THE UNTELEPORTED MAN




1

Over Rachmael ben Applebaum's head floated a creditor jet-balloon, and from within its
articulation-circuit a flat but handsome, masculine—artificial, however—voice boomed, magnified so that
not only Rachmael but everyone else crowding the ped-runnels heard it. The amplification was designed
this way; you were singled out and simultaneously exposed; public ridicule, the jeers of the
always-present crowds, was brought into play as a force working at you . . . and, Rachmael reflected,
for the creditor, free.
"Mr. Applebaum!" The hearty, rich but machine-sponsored voice echoed, rolled and boomed, and a
thousand human heads rotated in expectation, glanced up with amused interest, saw the creditor
jet-balloon and spied also its target: Rachmael ben Applebaum trying to get from the parking lot where
he had left his flapple and into the offices of Lies Incorporated, a distance of only two thousand
yards—but enough to make him visible so as to become the creditor balloon's target.
"Okay," Rachmael grated, and strode on, not breaking gait; he made for the fluoron-illuminated entrance
of the private police agency and did not look up; he pretended—as if this were possible—to ignore a
sight which, in the last three years, he had learned to know fully.
"Mr. Applebaum," the balloon boomed. "As of this Wednesday, November 8, 2014, you owe, as
inheritor of your late father's assets and debts, the sum of four million poscreds to Trails of Hoffman
Limited, a major backer in your late father's—"
"Okay!" Rachmael said violently, halting, peering up in futile anguish . . . the desire to puncture, deflate
and bring down the balloon was overwhelming—yet what could he do? By UN ordinance, a creditor
could hire such harassment; this was legal.
And the grinning crowd knew it. Saw in this for them a brief but amusing ent-show: entertainment.
However, he did not blame them; it was not their fault because they had over the years been trained this
way. All the info and edu media, controlled by the "disinterested" UN public affairs bureaus, had tinkered
with this facet of modern man's complex character: his ability to enjoy the suffering of someone else
whom he did not even know.
"I cannot," Rachmael said, "pay. And you know it." Above, the jet-balloon heard; it had exceeding
mar-velous aud receptors. But it did not believe him or care if what he said was true; its job was to
hound him, not to seek the truth. Standing on the runnel as it auto-matically carried him along, Rachmael
said, as reason-ably as possible, "At present I have no funds, because continuously up to now, one by
one, I've paid off as many of Applebaum Enterprise's creditors as I can."
Tauntingly, the mechanical voice from above boomed, "At three sigs on the poscred. Some settling of
accounts."
Rachmael said, "Give me time."
"Plans, Mr. Applebaum?" The voice twisted with scorn.
After a pause he said, "Yes." But he did not specify; it depended in part on what he obtained from the
private police agency, Lies Incorporated. If that was anything. But over the vidphone at least—he did
think he had detected a certain sympathetic resonance from the master proprietor of the police agency,
Matson Glazer-Holliday.
Now, in five minutes, in a formal screening-interview with a Lies Incorporated psych-rep, Rachmael
would find out—learn just how far the private police agency, which after all had to survive the
competition, had to stand up to the UN and the lesser titans of the nine planet system, would go in
staking a man who was not merely broke but who owed—owed for the wreckage of an industrial empire
which had collapsed, carrying its operator and owner, Maury Applebaum, to his—evi-dently—voluntary
death.



Evidently.A good word, and a big one, like any word pertaining to death. As the runnel, despite the
lurking, booming creditor balloon above, carried Rachmael toward the sanctuary of the shifting-color
doorway he thought, maybe they can help me there, too.
Because it had just never quite seemed reasonable to him that his father, and god knew he was familiar
with his father, would laser himself to death due to economic collapse . . . although admittedly, as
subsequent events had proved, that collapse was terminal for Applebaum Enterprise.
"You must pay," the jet-balloon howled. "Trails of Hoffman insists; your petition of bankruptcy was
turned down by the UN courts—you, Mr. Rachmael ben Applebaum, are legally liable for the sum of—"
The voice abruptly vanished as Rachmael crossed the threshold of the private inter-planetary police
agency, and the thoroughly soundproof rexeroid door slid shut after him.
"Yes, sir," the robot receptionist, not jeering but friendly, said to him; what a contrast with the circus
outside.
"Miss Holm," Rachmael said, and heard his voice shake. The creditor balloon had gotten to him; he was
trembling and perspiring.
"Syn-cof?" the receptionist asked sympathetically. "Or Martian fnikjuice tea, while you wait?"
Rachmael, getting out a genuine Tampa, Florida Gar-cia y Vega cigarillo, murmured, "I'll just sit, thanks."
He lit the cigar, waited. For Miss Freya Holm, whatever or whoever she was—and looked like.

A soft voice said, almost timidly, "Mr. ben Ap-plebaum? I'm Miss Holm. If you'll come into my
of-fice—" She held the door open, and she was perfection; his Garcia y Vega cigarillo dwindled,
neglected in the ashtray as he rose to his feet. She, no more than twenty, chitin-black long hair that hung
freely down her shoulders, teeth white as the glossy bond of the ex-pensive UN info mags . . . he stared
at her, at the small girl in the gold-spray bodice and shorts and sandals, with the single camellia over her
left ear, stared and thought,And this is my police protection.
"Sure." Numbly, he passed her, entered her small, contemporarily furnished office; in one glance he saw
artifacts from the extinct cultures of six planets. "But Miss Holm," he said, then, candidly, "maybe your
em-ployers didn't explain; there's pressure here. I've got one of the most powerful economic syndromes
in the Sol system after me. Trails of Hoffman—"
"THL," Miss Holm said, seating herself at her desk and touching theon ofher aud recorder, "is the owner
of Dr. Sepp von Einem's teleportation construct and hence monopolistically has made obsolete the
hyper-see liners and freighters of Applebaum Enterprise." On her desk before her she had a folio, which
she consulted. "You see, Mr. Rachmael ben Applebaum—" She glanced up. "I wish to keep you in
data-reference distinct from your father, the late Maury Applebaum. So may I call you Rachmael?"
"Y-yes," he said, nettled by her coolness, her small, firm poise—and the folio which lay before her; long
before he had consulted Listening Instructional Educa-tional Services—or, as the pop mind called it in
UN-egged-on derision, Lies Incorporated—the police
agency had gathered, with its many data-monitors, the totality of information pertaining to him and to the



col-lapse from abrupt technological obsolescence of the once formidable Applebaum Enterprise. And—
"Your late father," Freya Holm said, "died evidently at his own instigation. Officially the UN police list it
asSelbstmort . . . suicide. We however—" She paused, consulted the folio. "Hmm."
Rachmael said, "I'm not satisfied, but I'm resigned." After all, he could not bring back his heavy,
red-faced, nearsighted and highly over-taxed father,Selbstmort, in the official German of the UN, or not.
"Miss Holm," he began, but she cut him off, gently.
"Rachmael, the Telpor electronic entity of Dr. Sepp von Einem, researched and paid for, developed in
the several inter-plan labs of Trails of Hoffman, could do nothing else than bring chaos to the drayage
industry; Theodoric Ferry, who is chairman of the board of THL, must have known this when he financed
Dr. von Einem at his Schweinfort labs where the Telpor breakthrough occurred. And yet THL
owned—outside of your father's—the largest single holding of the now-defunct Applebaum Enterprise.
Therefore Trails of Hoffman Limited deliberately ruined a corporation which it had major
investments in . . . and this has seemed strange to us. And"—she glanced up alertly, tossed back her
mass of black hair—"now they hound you for restitution; correct?"
Rachmael nodded mutely.
Quietly, Miss Holm asked, "How long did it take a passenger liner of your father's corporation to reach
Whale's Mouth with a load of, say, five hundred colonists, plus their personal effects?"
After a tormented pause he said, "We—never even tried. Years. Even at hyper-see." The girl, across
from him, still waited, wanted to hear him say it. "With our flagship transport," he said, "eighteen years."
"And with Dr. von Einem's teleportation instru-ment—"
"Fifteen minutes," he said harshly. And Whale's Mouth, the number IX planet of the Fomalhaut system,
was to date the sole planet discovered either by manned or unmanned observers which was truly
habitable—truly a second Terra. Eighteen years . . . and even deep-sleep would not help, for such a
prolonged period; aging, although slowed down, althoughconsciousness was dimmed, still occurred.
Alpha and Prox; that had been all right; that had been short enough. But Fomal-haut, at twenty-four
light-years—
"We just couldn't compete," he said. "We simply could not carry colonists that far."
"Would you have tried, without von Einem's Telpor breakthrough?"
Rachmael said, "My father—"
"Was thinking about it." She nodded. "But then he died and it was too late and now you've had to sell
vir-tually all your ships to meet note-payment due-dates. Now, from us, Rachmael. You wanted . . . ?"
"I still own," he said, "our fastest, newest, biggest ship, theOmphalos; she's never been sold, no matter
how great the pressure THL has put on me, within and outside the UN courts." He hesitated, then said it.
"I want to go to Whale's Mouth. By ship. Not by Dr. von Einem's Telpor. And by my own ship, by what
we meant to be our—" He broke off. "I want to take her all the way to Fomalhaut, on an eighteen-year
voyage—alone. And when I arrive at Whale's Mouth I'll prove—"
"Yes?" Freya said. "Prove what, Rachmael?"



"That we could have done it. Had von Einem not come along with that thing, that—" He gestured, with
impotent fury.
Freya said, "Telpor is one of the most vital dis-coveries in human history, Rachmael. Teleportation, from
one star system to another, twenty-four light-years in fifteen minutes. When you reach Whale's Mouth by
theOmphalos, I for instance will be—" She calculated. "Forty-three years old."
He was silent.
"What," Freya asked in a soft voice, "would you ac-complish by your trip?"
He said, honestly, "I—don't know."
Presently Freya said, reading from her folio, "You have, for six months now, been thoroughly checking
out theOmphalos at a concealed—even from us—launch field and maintenance dock on Luna. She is
now con-sidered ready for the inter-system flight. Trails of Hoff-man has tried, through the courts, to
attach her to claim her as their legal property; this you have managed to fight. So far. But now—"
"My lawyers tell me," Rachmael said, "that three days stand between me and THL seizing theOm-phalos
."
"You can't blast off within three days?"
"The deep-sleep equipment. It's a week from being readied." He let out his breath raggedly. "A
subsidiary of THL manufactures vital components. They've been—held up."
Freya nodded. "And your coming here is to request us," she said, "to pick up theOmphalos, with one of
our veteran pilots, disappear with her for a week, until she's ready for the flight to Fomalhaut. Correct?"
"That's it," he said, and sat waiting. "I'm not good enough to lose her. They'd find me. But yours—one of
your best." He did not look directly at her; it meant too much.
"You can pay our fee of—"
"Nothing. I have absolutely no funds. Later, as I continue to liquidate the assets of the corporation,
possibly I—"
Freya said, "There's a note here, Xeroxed, from my employer, Mr. Glazer-Holliday. He observes that
you're poscredless. His instructions to us—" She read the note, silently. "However, we're to cooperate
with you, despite your financial helplessness." Glancing up at him she said, "We'll dispatch an experienced
pilot who will take theOmphalos off where THL, where even the UN agents acting for the Secretary
General, Herr Horst Bert old, won't find her. This our man can do—while you manage, if you can, to
obtain the final components of the deep-sleep equipment." She smiled slightly. "But I doubt if you'll obtain
those com-ponents, Rachmael; there's an additional memo here to that effect, too. You're right:
Theodoric Ferry sits on its board of directors, too, and this is all legal, this monopoly which the firm
possesses." Her smile was bitter. "UN sanctioned."
He was silent. Obviously it was hopeless; no matter how long the Lies Incorporated professional and
ultra-veteran space-pilot kept the huge liner theOmphalos lost between planets, the components would
be "held up unavoidably," as the invoices, marked back-order, would read.



"I think," Freya said presently, "that your problem is not the mere obtaining of deep-sleep components.
That can be handled; there are ways . . . we, for in-stance, can—although this will cost you a good deal
of money eventually—pick them up on the blackmarket. Your problem, Rachmael—"
"I know," he said. His problem was nothow to get to the Fomalhaut system, to its ninth planet, Whale's
Mouth, which was Terra's sole thriving colony-world. In fact his problem was not the eighteen-year
voyage at all.
His problem was—
Why go at all, when Dr. von Einem's Telpor con-struct, available at a nominal cost at any of Trails of
Hoffman's many retail outlets on Terra, made the trip a mere fifteen-minute minor journey, and within
fi-nancial reach of even the most modest, income-wise speaking, Terran family?
Aloud he said, "Freya, the trip by Telpor to Whale's Mouth—it sounds fine." And forty million Terran
citizens had taken advantage of it. And the aud and vid reports returning—via the Telpor construct—all
told glowingly of a world not overcrowded, of tall grass, of odd but benign animals, of new and lovely
cities built by robot-assists taken across at UN-expense to Whale's Mouth. "But—"
"But," Freya said, "the peculiar fact is that it's a one-way trip."
Instantly he nodded. "Yes, that's it.No one can come back. "
"That's easily explained. The Sol system is located at the axis of the universe; the recession of the
extra-galactic nebulae demonstrates von Einem's Theorem One that—"
"There must," he said, "out of those forty million people, be afewwho want to return. But the TV and
'pape reports say they're all ecstatically happy. You've seen the endless TV shows, life at
Newcolonizedland. It's—"
"Too perfect, Rachmael?"
"Statistically,malcontents must exist. Why do we never hear of them? And we can't go and take a
look." Because, if you went by Telpor to Whale's Mouth and saw, you were there, as they were,to stay.
So if you did find malcontents—what could you do for them? Be-cause you could not take them back;
you could only join them. And he had the intuition that somehow this just wouldn't be of much use. Even
the UN left Newcolo-nizedland alone, the countless UN welfare agencies, the personnel and bureaus
newly set up by the present Sec-retary General Horst Bertold, from New Whole Ger-many: the largest
political entity in Europe—even they stopped at the Telpor gates. Neues Einige Deutschland . . . N.E.D.
Far more powerful than the mangy, dwin-dling French Empire or the U.K.—they were pale rem-nants of
the past.
And New Whole Germany—as the election to UN Secretary General of Horst Bertold showed—was
the Wave of the Future . . . as the Germans themselves liked to phrase it.
"So in other words," Freya said, "you'd take an empty passenger liner to the Fomalhaut system, spend
eighteen years in transit, you, the sole unteleported man, among the seven billion citizens of Terra, with
the idea—or should I say, the hope?—that when you arrive finally at Whale's Mouth, in the year 2032,
you'll find a passenger complement, five hundred or so unhappy souls who want out? And so you then
can resume com-mercial operations . . . von Einem takes them there in fifteen minutes and then eighteen



years later you return them to Terra, back home to the Sol system."
"Yes," he said fiercely.
"Plus another eighteen years—for them—too—for the flight back. For you thirty-six years in all. You'd
return to Terra in the year—" She calculated. "2050 A.D. I'd be sixty-one years old; Theodoric Ferry,
even Horst Bertold, would be dead; perhaps Trails of Hoff-man Limited wouldn't even exist, any more . .
. cer-tainly Dr. Sepp von Einem would be dead years ago; let's see: he's in his eighties now. No, he'd
never live to see you reach Whale's Mouth, let alone return. So if all this is to make him feel bad—"
"Is it insane?" Rachmael said. "To believe, first, thatsome unhappy persons must be stuck at Whale's
Mouth . . . and yet we're not hearing, via THL's monopoly of all info media, all energy, passing back this
way. And second—"
"And second," Freya said, "to want to spend eighteen years of your life in getting there to rescue them."
Professional, intent, she eyed him. "Is this idealism? Or is this vengeance against Dr. von Einem because
of his Telpor construct that made your family's liners and commercial carriers obsolete for inter-system
travel? After all, if you do manage to leave in theOm-phalos, it'll be big news, a novelty; it'll be fully
covered on TV and in the 'papes, here on Terra; even the UN won't be able to squelch the story—the
first, sole,manned vessel to go to Fomalhaut, not just one of those old-time instrument packages. Why,
you'd be a time capsule; we'd all be waiting for you to arrive first there and then, in 2050, back here."
"A time capsule," he said, "like the one fired off at Whale's Mouth. Which never arrived here on Terra."
She shrugged. "Passed Terra by, was attracted by the sun's gravitational field; was swallowed up
unnoticed."
"Unnoticed byany tracking station? Out of over six thousand separate monitoring devices in orbit in the
Sol systemnone detected the time capsule when it arrived?"
Frowning, Freya said, "What do you mean to imply, Rachmael?"
"The time capsule," Rachmael said, "from Whale's Mouth, the launching of which we watched years ago
on TV—it wasn't detected by our tracking stations because it never arrived. And it never arrived, Miss
Holm, because despite those crowd scenesit was never sent ."
"You mean what we saw on TV—"
"The vid signal, via Telpor," Rachmael said, "which showed the happy masses at Whale's Mouth
cheering at the vast public launching ceremony of the time cap-sule—were fakes. I've run and rerun
recordings of them; the crowd noise is spurious." Reaching into his cloak he brought out a seven-inch reel
of iron oxide Am-pex and tape; he tossed it onto her desk. "Play it back. Carefully.There were no
people cheering. And for a good reason. Because no time capsule, containing quaint artifacts from the
Fomalhaut ancient civiliza-tions, was launched from Whale's Mouth."
"But—" She stared at him in disbelief, then picked up the aud tape, held the reel uncertainly."Why?"
"I don't know," Rachmael said. "But when theOm-phalos reaches the Fomalhaut system and Whale's
Mouth and I see Newcolonizedland, I'll know." And, he thought, I don't think I'll find ten or sixty
malcon-tents out of forty million . . . by that time, of course, it'll be something like a billion colonists. I'll
find—



He ended the thought abruptly. He did not know.
But eventually he would know. In the little matter of eighteen years.

2

In the sybaritic living room of his villa, on his satellite as it orbited Terra, the owner of Lies
In-corporated, Matson Glazer-Holliday, sat in his human-made dressing gown smoking a prize, rare
Antonio y Cleopatra cigar and listening to the aud tape of the crowd noises.
And, directly before him he watched the oscilloscope as it transformed the audio signal into a visual one.
To Freya Holm he said, "Yes, there is a cycle. You can see it, even though you can't hear it. This aud
track is continuous, running over and over again. Hence the man's right; it's a fake."
"Could Rachmael ben Applebaum have—"
"No," Matson said. "I've sequestered an aud copy from the UN info archives; it agrees. Rachmael didn't
tamper with the tape; it's exactly what he claims it to be." He sat back, pondering.
Strange, he thought, that von Einem's Telpor gadget works only one way, radiating matter out . . . with
no return of that matter, at least by teleportation, possible. So, rather conveniently for Trails of Hoffman,
all we get via Telpor as a feedback from Whale's Mouth is anelectronic signal, energy alone . . . and this
one now ex-posed as a fake; as a research agency I should have dis-covered this long ago—Rachmael,
with all his creditors hounding him jet-balloonwise, keeping him awake night and day, hammering at him
with countless technological assists, impeding him in the normal course of con-ducting routine business,
has detected this spuriousness, and I—damn it. Matson thought, I missed, here. He felt gloomy.
"Cutty Sark Scotch and water?" Freya asked.
He nodded absently as Freya, who was his mistress, disappeared into the liquor antechamber of the villa
to see if the 1985 bottle—worth a fortune—were empty yet.
But, on the credit side, he had been suspicious.
From the start he had doubted the so-called "Theorem One" of Dr. von Einem; it sounded too much like
a cover, this one-way transmission by the technicians of THL's multitude of retail outlets. Write home
from Whale's Mouth, son, when you get there, he thought acidly; tell your old mom how it is on the
colony world with its fresh air, sunshine, all those cute little animals, those wondrous buildings THL
robots are constructing . . . and the report-back, the letter,as elec-tronic signal, had duly arrived. But
the beloved son; he could not personally, directly report. Could not return to tell his story, and, as in the
ancient story of the lion's den, all the footprints of guileless creatures ledin to the den, yet none ledout. It
was the fable all over again—with something even more sinister added. That of what appeared more and
more to be a thoroughly phony trail ofoutgoing tracks: the electronic message-units. By someone who is
versed in sophisticated hard-ware, Matson thought; someone is tinkering around, and is there any reason
to look beyond the figure of Dr. Sepp von Einem himself, the inventor of the Telpor, plus Neues Einige



Deutschland's very efficient techni-cians who ran Ferry's retail machinery?
There was something he did not like about those Ger-man technicians who manned the Telpors. So
businesslike. As their ancestors must have been, Matson mused. Back in the twentieth century when
those ancestors, with the same affectless calm, fed bodies into ovens or living humans into ersatz shower
baths which turned out to be Zyklon B hydrogen cyanide gas chambers. And financed by reputable big
Third Reich business, by Herr Krupp u. Sohnen. Just as von Einem is financed by Trails of Hoffman, with
its vast central offices in Grosser Berlinstadt—the new capital of New Whole Germany, the city in fact
from which our distinguished UN Secretary General emanates.
"Get me," Matson said to Freya, "instead of Scotch and water, the file on Horst Bertold."
In the other room Freya rang up the autonomic research equipment wired into the walls of the villa . . .
electronic hardware, minned—miniaturized—for the most part, of a data-sorting and receiving nature,
plus the file-banks, and—
Certain useful artifacts which didnot involve data but which involved high-velocity A-warhead darts that,
were the satellite to be attacked by any of the UN's repertory of offensive weapons, would take up the
fight and abolish the missiles before they reached their target.
At his villa on his Brocard ellipse satellite Matson was safe. And, as a precaution, he conducted as much
business as possible from this spot; below, in New York City, at Lies Incorporated's offices, he always
felt naked. Felt, in fact, the nearby presence of the UN and Horst Bertold's legions of "Peace Workers,"
those armed, gray-faced men and women who, in the name of Pax Terrae, roamed the world, even into
the pathetic moonies, the sad, failure-but-still-extant early "colony" satellites which had come before von
Einem's break-through and the discovery by George Hoffman of Fomalhaut IX, now called Whale's
Mouth and nowthe colony.
Too bad, Matson thought archly, that George Hoff-man didn't discover more planets in more star
systems habitable by us, the frail needs of living, sentient, men-tating biochemical upright bipeds which we
humans are.
Hundreds and hundreds of planets, but—
Instead, temperature which melted thermo-fuses. No air. No soil. No water.
One could hardly say of such worlds—Venus had proved a typical example—that the "living was easy."
The living, in fact, on such worlds was confined to homeostatic domes with their own at, wa, and
self-regu temp.
Housing, per dome, perhaps three hundred somatic souls. Rather a small number, considering that as of
this year Terra's population stood at seven billion.
"Here," Freya said, sliding down to seat herself, legs tucked under her, on the deep-pilewool carpet near
Matson. "The file on H.B." She opened it at random; Lies Incorporated field reps had done a thorough
job: many data existed here that, via the UN's carefully watchdogged info media, never had reached the
public, even the so-called "critical" analysts and columnists. They could, by law, criticize to their hearts'
content, the character, habits, abilities and shaving customs of Herr Bertold . . . except, however, the
basic facts were denied them.
Not so, however, to Lies Incorporated—an ironic sobriquet, in view of the absolutely verified nature of



the data now before its owner.
It was harsh reading. Even for him.
The year of Horst Bertold's birth: 1964. Slightly before the Space Age had begun; like Matson
Glazer-Holliday, Horst was a remnant of the old world when all that had been glimpsed in the sky were
"flying saucers," a misnomer for a U.S. Air Force antimissile weapon which had, in the brief confrontation
of 1992, proved ineffectual. Horst had been born to middle-class Berlin—West Berlin, it had then been
called, because, and this was difficult to remember, Germany had in those days been divided—parents:
his father had owned a meat market . . . rather fitting, Matson reflected, in that Horst's father had been an
S.S. officer and former member of an Einsatzgruppe which had murdered thousands of innocent persons
of Slavic and Jewish ancestry . . . although this had not interfered with Johann Bertold's meat market
business in the 1960s and '70s. And then, in 1982, at the age of eighteen, young Horst himself had
entered the spotlight (needless to say, the statute of limitations had run out on his father, who had never
been prosecuted by the West German legal ap-paratus for his crimes of the '40s, and had, in addition,
evaded the commando squads from Israel who, by 1980, had closed up shop, given up the task of
tracking down the former mass murderers). Horst, in 1982, had been a leader in the Reinholt Jugend.
Ernst Reinholt, from Hamburg, had headed a party which had striven to unify Germany once more; the
deal would be that as a military and economic power she would be neutral between East and West. It
had taken ten more years, but in the fracas of 1992 he had ob-tained from the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.
what he wanted: a united, free Germany, called by its present name, and just chuck full of vim andMacht.
And, under Reinholt, Neues Einige Deutschland had played dirty pool from the start. But no one was
really surprised; East and West were busy erecting tents where major popcens—population centers such
as Chicago and Moscow—had existed, and hoping to god that the Sino-Cuban wing of the C.P. did not,
taking advantage of the situation, move in and entrench. . . .
It had been the secret protocol of Reinholt and his N.W.G. that it would not be neutral after all. On the
contrary.
New Whole Germany would take out China.
So this was the unsavory basis on which the Reich had re-obtained unity. ItsWaffen technicians had
devised, as instructed, weapons which had, in 1997, dealt a ter-minal punch to People's China. Matson,
examining the folio, very rapidly scanned this part, because the Reich had come up with some
show-stoppers, and even the abominable U.S. nerve gas had seemed like a field of daisies in
comparison—he did not wish to see any men-tion of what Krupp u. Sohnen had devised as an answer to
China's thousands of millions who were spilling as far west as the Volga, and toward the U.S., were
cross-ing from Siberia—taken in 1993—into Alaska. In any case the compact had been agreed on, and
even Faust would have blanched at it; now the world had no People's China but a New Whole Germany
to contend with.
And what a quid pro quo that had proved to be. Because, correctly and legally, Neues Einige
Deutsch-land had obtained control of the sole planet-wide and hence Sol system-wide governing
structure, the UN. They held it now. And the former member of the Reinholt Jugend, Horst Bertold, was
its Secretary General. And had faced squarely, as he had promised when cam-paigning for election—it
had become, by 1995, an elec-tive office—that he would deal with the colonization problem; he would
find a Final Solution to the tor-mented condition that (one) Terra was as overpopulated throughout as
Japan had been in 1970 and (two) both the alternate planets of the Sol system and the moonies and the
domes et al. had failed wretchedly.



Horst had found, via Dr. von Einem's Telpor telepor-tation construct, a habitable planet in a star system
too far from Sol to be reached by the quondam drayage en-terprise of Maury Applebaum. Whale's
Mouth, and the Telpor mechanisms at Trails of Hoffman's retail out-lets, werethe answer.
To all appearances it was duck soup, feathers, scut included. But—
"See?" Matson said to Freya. "Here's the written transcript of Horst Bertold's speech before he was
elected and before von Einem showed up with the Telpor gadget.The promise was made before
teleporta-tion to the Fomalhaut system was technologically possi-ble— in fact, before the existence
of Fomalhaut was even known to unmanned elderly relay-monitors."
"So?"
Matson said grimly, "So our UN Secretary General had a mandate before he had a solution. And to the
German mind that means one thing and one thing only. The cat and rat farm solution." Or, as he now
suspected, the dog-food factory solution.
It had been suggested, ironically, in imitation of Swift, by a fiction writer of the 1950s, that the "Negro
Question" in the U.S. be solved by the building of giant factories which made Negroes into canned dog
food. Satire, of course, like Swift'sA Modest Proposal, that the problem of starvation among the Irish be
solved by the eating of the children . . . Swift himself lamenting, as a final irony, that he had no children of
his own to of-fer to the market for consumption. Grisly. But—
This all pointed to the seriousness—not merely of the problem of overpopulation and insufficient food
pro-duction—but to the insane, schizoid solutions seriously being considered. The brief World War
Three—never officially called that; called instead, a Pacifying Action, just as the Korean War had been a
"Police Action"—had taken care of a few millions of people, but—not quite enough. As a solution it had
worked to a partial extent; and was, in many influential quarters, viewed exactly as that: as a partial
solution. Not as a catas-trophe but as a half-answer.
And Horst Bertold had promised the balance of the answer.
Whale's Mouth was it.
"So in my opinion," Matson murmured, to himself mostly, "I've always been suspicious of Whale's
Mouth. If I hadn't read Swift and C. Wright Mills and the Herman Kahn Report for Rand Corporation . .
." He glanced at Freya. "There have," he said, "always been people who would solve the problem that
way."And I think, he thought, as he listened to the aud tape of the crowd noises, a tape which pretended
to consist of a transcript from the launching, at Whale's Mouth, of the ritualistic, celebration-inspired time
capsule back through hyper-space—or in some such ultra high velocity fashion—to Terra,that we have
those people and that solution with us again.
We have, in other words, UN Secretary General Horst Bertold and Trails of Hoffman Limited and its
economic multi-pseudopodia empire. And dear Dr. Sepp von Einem and his many Telpor outlets, his
curiouslyone-way teleporting machine.
"That land," Matson murmured, vaguely quoting, lord knew who, what sage of the past, "which all of us
must visit one day . . . that land beyond the grave. But no one had returned to report on't. And until they
do—"



Freya said perceptively, "Until they do, you're going to stay suspicious. Of the whole Newcolonizedland
set-tlement. Aud and vid signals are not good enough to convince you—becauseyou know how easily
they can be faked." She gestured at the deck running the tape at this very moment.
"A client," Matson corrected her. "Who on a non-verbal level, what our Reich friends callthinking with
the blood, suspects that if he takes his one remaining inter-stellar worthy flagship, the—" What was it
called? "TheNavel," he said. "TheOmphalos; that's what that lofty Greek word means, by the way.
Takes theNavel direct to Fomalhaut, that after eighteen years of weary deep-sleep which is not quite
sleep, more a hypo-nagogic, restless tossing and turning at low temp, slowed-down metabolism, he will
arrive at Whale's Mouth, and oddly it will not be beer and skittles. It will not be happy conapt dwellers,
smiling children in auto-nomic schools, tame, exotic, native life forms. But—"
But just what would he find?
If, as he suspected, the aud and vid tracks passing from Whale's Mouth to Terra via von Einem's Telpor
mechanisms were covers—what really lay beneath?
He simply could not guess, not when forty million people were involved. The dog-food factory? Are,
god forbid, those forty million men, women and childrendead? Is it a boneyard, with no one there, no
one even to extract the gold from their teeth—because now we use stainless steel?
He did not know, but—someone knew. Perhaps en-tire New Whole Germany, which, having cornered
the lion's share of power in the UN, hence ruled throughout the nine planets of the Sol system; perhaps as
a totality it, on a subrational, instinctive level, knew. As, in the 1940s, it had intuited the existence of the
gas chambers beyond the cages of twittering birds and those high walls that kept out all sight and sound .
. . and except for that oddly acrid smoke from chimneys all day long—
"They know," Matson said aloud. Horst Bertold knew, and so did Theodoric Ferry, the owner of THL,
and so did doddering but still crafty old Dr. von Einem. And the one hundred and thirty-five million
inhabitants of Neues Einige Deutschland, to some degree; not ver-bally—you couldn't put an expert
psych rep of Lies In-corporated in a small room with a Munich cobbler, run a few routine
drug-injections, make the standard quasi-Psionic transcripts, EEGs of his para-psychological reactions,
and learn, know, the literal, exact truth.
The whole matter was, damn it, still obscured. And this time it was not cages of twittering birds or
shower baths but something else—something, however, equally effective. Trails of Hoffman published
3-D, multi-color, brilliantly artistic, exciting brochures displaying the ecstatic life beyond the Telpor nexus;
the TV ran ceaseless, drive-you-mad ads all day and night, of the underpopulated veldt landscape of
Whale's Mouth, the balmy climate (via olfactory track), the warm the-answer-is-yes two-moon-filled
nights . . . it was a land of romance, freedom, experimentation, kibbutzim with-out the desert: cooperative
living where oranges grewnaturally, and as large as grapefruits, which themselves resembled melons or
the breasts of the women there. But.
Matson decided carefully, "I am sending a veteran field rep across, via normal Telpor, posing as an
un-married businessman who hopes to open a watch repair retail shop at Whale's Mouth. He will have
grafted sub-derm a high-gain transmitter; it will—"
"I know," Freya said patiently; this was evening and she obviously wished for a relaxation of the grim
reality of their mutual business. "It will regularly release a signal at ultra-high frequency on a none-used
band, which will ultimately be picked up here. But that'll takeweeks."



"Okay." He had it now. The Lies Incorporated field rep would send back a letter, via Telpor, in the
cus-tomary manner encoded. It was that simple. If the letter arrived: fine. If not—
"You will wait," Freya said, "and wait. And no en-coded letter will come. And then you will really begin
to think that our client, Mr. ben Applebaum, has tripped over something ominous and huge in the long
darkness which is our collective life. Andthen what will you do? Go across yourself?"
"Then I'm sending you," Matson said. "As the field rep there."
"No," she said, instantly.
"So Whale's Mouth frightens you. Despite all the glossy, expensive literature available free."
"I know Rachmael is right. I knew it when he walked in the door; I knew it from your memo. I'm not
going; that's that." She faced her employer-paramour calmly.
"Then I'll draw at random from the field-personnel pool." He had not been serious; why should he offer
his mistress as a pawn in this? But he had proved what he wished to prove: their joint fears were not
merely in-tellectual. At this point in their thinking neither Freya nor he would risk the crossing via Telpor
to Whale's Mouth, as thousands of guileless citizens of Terra, lugging their belongings and with innocent
high hopes, did daily.
I hate, he thought, to turn anyone into the goat. But—
"Pete Burnside. Rep in Detroit. We'll tell him we wish to set up a Lies Incorporated branch at Whale's
Mouth under a cover name. Hardware store. Or TV fixit shop. Get his folio; see what talents he has."
We'll make one of our own people, Matson thought, the vic-tim—and it hurt, made him sick. And yet it
should have been done months ago.
But it had taken bankrupt Rachmael ben Applebaum to goose them into acting, he realized. A man
pursued by those monster creditor balloons that bellow all your personal defects and secrets. A man
willing to undergo athirty-six year trip to prove that something is foul in the land of milk and protein on
the far side of those Telpor gates through which, on receipt of five poscreds, any adult Terran can avail
himself for the purpose of—
God knew.
God—and the German hierarchy dominating the UN plus THL; he had no illusions about that:they did
not need to analyze the crowd-noise track of the time cap-sule ceremony at Whale's Mouth to know.
As he had. And his job was investigation; he was, he realized with spurting, burgeoning horror, possibly
the only individual on Terrareally in a position to push through and obtain an authentic glimpse of this.
Short of eighteen years of space flight . . . a time-period which would allow infinite millions, even a billion
if the extrapolations were correct, to pass by way of Telpor constructs on that—to him—terrifying
one-way trip to the colony world.
If you are wise, Matson said to himself grimly, you never take one-way trips. Anywhere. Even to Boise,
Idaho . . . even across the street. Be certain, when you start,that you can scramble back.



3

At one in the morning Rachmael ben Apple-baum was yanked from his sleep—this was usual, because
the assorted creditor-mechanisms had been get-ting to him on a round-the-clock basis, now. However,
this time it was no robot raptor-like creditor mechan-ism. This was a man. Dark, a Negro; small and
shrewd-looking. Standing at Rachmael's door withi.d. papers extended.
"From Listening Instructional Educational Ser-vices," the Negro said. He added, "I hold a Class-A
inter-plan vehicle pilot-license."
That woke Rachmael. "You're going to take theOm-phalos off Luna?"
"If I can find her." The dark, small man smiled briefly. "May I come in? I'd like you to accompany me to
your maintenance yard on Luna so there's no mis-take; I know your employees there are armed;
other-wise—" He followed Rachmael into the conapt living room—the sole room, in fact: living
conditions on Terra being what they were. "Otherwise Trails of Hoffman would be ferrying equipment to
their domes on Mars with theOmphalos as of last month—right?"
"Right," Rachmael said as he blearily dressed.
"My name's Al Dosker. And I did you a small side-favor, Mr. ben Applebaum. I took out a
creditor-construct waiting in the hall." He displayed, then, a side arm. "I suppose, if it got into litigation,
it'd be called 'property destruct.' Anyhow, when you and I leave, no THL device is going to monitor our
path." He added, half to himself, "That I could detect, anyhow." At his chest he patted a variety ofbug
chasers; minned elec-tronic instruments that recorded the presence of vid and aud receptors in the
vicinity.
Shortly the two men were on their way to the roof field, where Dosker had parked his—as Rachmael
dis-covered—taxi-marked flapple. As they entered he no-ticed how ordinary it looked . . . but as it
arced into the night sky he blinked at its velocity and accepted the fact that this was not the usual thrust
which now impelled them; they had hit 3.5 Machs within micro-seconds.
"You'll direct me," Dosker said. "Since even we at Lies Incorporated don't know where you've got the
Omphalos; you did a good job of berthing her, or perhaps we're beginning to slip . . . or both."
"Okay." At the 3-D Lunar map he took hold of the locating trailing-arm, linked the pivot in position, then
swept out a route until the terminus of the arm touched the recessed locus where his technicians worked
busily at theOmphalos— worked, while waiting for parts which would never come.
"We're off course," Dosker said, abruptly. Speaking not to Rachmael but into his console mike.
"Phooed."
Phooed—atrade term, and Rachmael felt fear, because the word was a condensation of P.U.—picked
up. Picked up by a field, and this one was moving Dosker's small flapple out of its trajectory; at once
Dosker fired the huge Whetstone-Milton rockets, tried to reassert with their enormous strength
homeo-course . . . but the field continued to tug, even against the millions of pounds of thrust of the twin
engines, as both fired in unison, acting as retro-jets against the field exerting its presence unseen but, on a
variety of console instruments, registering.



Rachmael, after an interval of strained, wordlesssilence, said to Dosker, "Where's it taking us?"
"From a Three to L course," Dosker said laconically.
"Not to Luna, then." They would not, the two of them, reach theOmphalos' place of berth; that was now
clear. But—where instead?
"We're in T-orb," Dosker said. Orbit around Earth, despite the push of the two W-M engines; Dosker
now, reluctantly, cut them. Fuel for them had no doubt dropped to a dangerously low level: if the field let
go they would orbit anyhow, orbit without the possibility of being capable of creating a trajectory that
would lead to an ultimate landing either on Lunaor on Terra. "They've got us," Dosker said, then, half to
Rachmael and half into the mike that projected from the ship's console. He recited a series of encoded
instructions into the mike, listened, then cursed, said to Rachmael, "We're cut off aud and vid, all signal
contact; I'm not getting through to Matson. So that's it."
"That's what?" Rachmael demanded. "You mean we give up? We just orbit Terra forever and die when
we run out of oxygen?" Was this the fight that Lies In-corporated put up when faced by Trails of
Hoffman? He, alone, had held out better; now he was disgusted, astonished and completely perplexed,
and he watched without comprehension as Dosker inspected his bank ofbug chasers at his chest. At the
moment the Lies In-corporated pilot seemed interested only in whether or not monitors were picking
them up—as well as con-trolling, externally, the trajectory of their ship.
Dosker said, "No monitors. Look, friend ben Apple-baum." He spoke swiftly. "They cut my
transmission on aud by micro-relay to Matson's satellite, but of course—" His dark eyes glinted with
amusement. "I have on me a dead man's throttle; if a continuous signal from me is interrupted it
automatically sets off an alarm at Lies Incorporated, at its main offices in New York and also at Matson's
satellite. So by now they know something's happened." He lowered his voice, speaking almost to himself
alone. "We'll have to wait to find out if they can get to us before it doesn't matter."
The ship, without power, in orbit, glided silently.
And then, jarringly, something nosed it; Rachmael fell; sliding along the floor to the far wall he saw
Dosker tumble, too, and knew that this had been the locking of another ship or similar device against
them—knew and then all at once realized that at least it hadn't detonated. At least it had not been a
missile. Because if it had—
"They could," Dosker said, as he got unsteadily to his feet, "have taken us out permanently." By that he,
too, meant a detonating weapon. He turned toward the tri-stage entrance hatch, used for null-atmosphere
pene-tration.
The hatch, its circular seal-controls spun from im-pulses emanating outside, swung open.
Three men, two of them riffraff with lasers, with the decayed eyes of those who had been bought,
hamstrung, lost long ago, came first. And then a clear-faced elegant man who would never be bought
because he was a great buyer in the market of men; he was a dealer, not pro-duce for sale.
It was Theodoric Ferry, chairman of the board of Trails of Hoffman Limited. Ahead of him his two
employees swung a vacuum-cleaner-like mechanism; it searched, buzzing and nosing, probing until its
oper-ators were satisfied; they nodded to Theodoric, who then addressed Rachmael.



"May I seat myself?"
After a startled pause Rachmael said, "Sure."
"Sorry, Mr. Ferry," Dosker said. "The only seat is taken." He sat at the control console in such a way
that his small body had expanded at its base to fill both bucket seats; his face was hard and hating.
Shrugging, the large, white-haired man said, "All right." He eyed Dosker. "You're Lies' top pilot, aren't
you? Al Dosker . . . yes, I recognize you from the clips we've made of you. On your way to the
Omphalos. But you don't need Applebaum here to tell you where she is;we can tell you." Theodoric
Ferry dug into his cloak, brought out a small packet which he tossed to Al Dosker. "The locus of the
dry-docks where Applebaum has got her."
"Thanks, Mr. Ferry," Dosker said with sarcasm so great that his voice was almost forged into
incompre-hensibility.
Theodoric said, "Now look, Dosker; you sit quietly and mind your own business. While I talk to
Apple-baum. I've never met him personally, but I knew his very-much-missed late father." He extended
his hand.
Dosker said, "If you shake with him, Rachmael, he'll deposit a virus contamination that'll produce liver
toxicity within your system inside an hour."
Glowering, Theodoric said to the Negro, "I asked you to stay in your place. A pun." He then removed
the membrane-like, up-to-now invisible glove of plastic which covered his hand. So Dosker had been
right, Rachmael realized as he watched Theodoric carefully deposit the glove in the ship's incinerating
disposal-chute. "Anyhow," Theodoric said, almost plaintively, "we could have squirted feral airborne
bacteria around by now."
"And taken out yourselves," Dosker pointed out.
Theodoric shrugged. Then, speaking carefully to Rachmael he said, "I respect what you're trying to do.
Don't laugh."
"I was not," Rachmael said, "laughing. Just sur-prised."
"You want to keep functioning, after the economic collapse; you want to keep your legitimate creditors
from attaching the few—actually sole—asset that Ap-plebaum Enterprise still possesses—good for you,
Rach-mael. I'd have done the same. And you impressed Mat-son; that's why he's supplying you his only
decent pilot."
With a mild grin, Dosker reached into his pocket for a pack of cigarillos; at once the two decayed-eyed
men ac-companying Theodoric caught his arm, expertly manip-ulated it—the harmless pack of cigarillos
fell to the floor of the ship.
One after another, the cigarillos were cut open by Theodoric's men, inspected . . . the fifth one turned
out to be hard; it did not yield to the sharp-bladed pocket knife, and, a moment later, a more complex
analytical device showed the cigarillo to be a homeostatic cephalo-tropic dart.
"Whose Alpha-wave pattern?" Theodoric Ferry asked Dosker.



"Yours," Dosker said tonelessly. He watched with-out affect as the two decayed-eyed but very expert
employees of THL crushed the dart under heel, render-ing it useless.
"Then you expected me," Ferry said, looking a little nonplussed.
Dosker said, "Mr. Ferry, Ialways expect you."
Returning once more to Rachmael, Theodoric Ferry said, "I admire you and I want to terminate this
conflict between you and THL. We have an inventory of your assets. Here." He extended a sheet toward
Rachmael; at that, Rachmael turned toward Dosker for advice.
"Take it,"Dosker said.
Accepting the sheet, Rachmael scanned it. The inven-tory was accurate; these did constitute the slight
totality of the remaining assets of Applebaum Enterprise. And—glaringly, as Ferry had said, the only item
of any au-thentic value was theOmphalos herself, the great liner plus the repair and maintenance facilities
on Luna which now, hive-like, surrounded and checked her as she waited futilely . . . he returned the
inventory to Ferry, who, seeing his expression, nodded.
"We agree, then," Theodoric Ferry said. "Okay. Here's what I propose, Applebaum. You can keep the
Omphalos. I'll instruct my legal staff to withdraw the writ to the UN courts demanding that theOmphalos
be placed under a state of attachment."
Dosker, startled, grunted; Rachmael stared at Ferry.
"What," Rachmael said, then, "in return?"
"This. That theOmphalos never leave the Sol system. You can very readily develop a profitable
operation transporting passengers and cargo between the nine planets and to Luna. Despite the fact—"
"Despite the fact," Rachmael said, "that theOm-phalos was built as an inter-stellar carrier, not inter-plan.
It's like using—"
"It's that," Ferry said, "or lose theOmphalos to us."
"So Rachmael agrees"—Dosker spoke up—"not to take theOmphalos to Fomalhaut. The written
agree-ment won't mention any one particular star system, but it's not Prox and not Alpha. Right, Ferry?"
After a pause Theodoric Ferry said, "Take it or leave it."
Rachmael said, "Why, Mr. Ferry?What's wrong at Whale's Mouth? This deal—it proves I'm right."
That was obvious; he saw it, Dosker saw it—and Ferry must have known that in making it he was
ratifying their in-timations. Limit theOmphalos to the nine planets of the Sol system? And yet—the
corporation Applebaum Enterprise, as Ferry said,would continue; it would live on as a legal, economic
entity. And Ferry would see that the UN turned a certain amount, an acceptable quan-tity, of commerce
its way. Rachmael would wave good-bye to Lies Incorporated, to first this small dark superior space
pilot, and then, by extension, to Freya Holm, to Matson Glazer-Holliday, cut in effect himself off from the
sole power which had chosen to back him.
"Go ahead," Dosker said. "Accept the idea. After all, the deep-sleep components won't arrive, but it
won't matter, because you're not going into 'tween system space anyhow." He looked tired.



Theodoric Ferry said, "Your father, Rachmael; Maury would have done anything to keep the
Om-phalos. You know in two days we'll have her—and once we do, there's no chance you'll ever get
her back. Think about it."
"I—know right now," Rachmael said. Lord, if he and Dosker had managed to get theOmphalos out
tonight, lost her in space where THL couldn't find her . . . and yet that was already over; it had ended
when the field had overcome the enormous futile thrust of the twin engines of Dosker's Lies Incorporated
ship: Trails of Hoffman had stepped in too soon. In time.
All along, Theodoric Ferry had pre-thought them; it was not a moral issue: it was a pragmatic one.
"I have legal forms drawn up," Ferry said. "If you'll come with me." He nodded toward the hatch. "The
law requires three witnesses. On the part of THL, we have those witnesses." He smiled, because it was
over and he knew it. Turning, he walked leisurely toward the hatch. The two decayed-eyed employees
followed, both men relaxed . . . they passed into the open circularity of the hatch—
And then convulsed throughout, from scalp to foot, internally destroyed; as Rachmael, shocked and
terri-fied, watched, he saw their neurological, musculature systems give out; he saw them, both men
penetrated en-tirely, so that each became, horrifying him, flopping, quivering, malfunctioning—more than
malfunctioning: each unit of their bodies fought with all other portions, so that the two heaps on the floor
became warring sub-syndromes within themselves, as muscle strained against muscle, visceral apparatus
against diaphrag-matic strength, auricular and ventricular fibrillation; both men, unable to breathe,
deprived even of blood circulation, staring, fighting within their bodies which were no longer true bodies .
..
Rachmael looked away.
"Cholinesterase-destroying gas," Dosker said, be-hind him, and at that instant Rachmael became aware
of the tube pressed to his own neck, a medical artifact which had injected into his blood stream its freight
of atropine, the antidote to the vicious nerve gas of the no-torious FMC Corporation, the original
contractors for this, the most destructive of all anti-personnel weapons of the previous war.
"Thanks," Rachmael said to Dosker, as he saw, now, the hatch swing shut; the Trails of Hoffman
satellite, with its now inert field, was being detached—within it persons who werenot THL employees
pried it loose from Dosker's flapple.
The dead man's throttle signaling device—or rather null-signaling device—had done its job; Lies
Incorpora-ted experts had arrived and at this moment were system-atically dismantling the THL
equipment.
Philosophically, Theodoric Ferry stood with his hands in the pockets of his cloak, saying nothing, not
even noticing the spasms of his two employees on the floor near him, as if, by deteriorating in response to
the gas, they had somehow proved unworthy.
"It was nice," Rachmael managed to say to Dosker, as the hatch once more swung open, this time
admitting several employees of Lies Incorporated, "that your co-workers administered the atropine to
Ferry as well as to me." Generally, in this business, no one was spared.
Dosker, studying Ferry, said, "He was given no atropine."



Reaching, he withdrew the empty tube with its inject-ing needle from his own neck, then the counterpart
item from Rachmael's. "How come, Ferry?" Dosker said.
There was, from Ferry, no answer.
"Impossible," Dosker said. "Every living organism is—" Suddenly he grabbed Ferry's arm; grunting, he
swung brusquely the arm back, against its normal span—and yanked.
Theodoric Ferry's arm, at the shoulder-joint, came off. Revealing trailing conduits and minned
compo-nents, those of the shoulder still functioning, those of the arm, deprived of power, now inert.
"A sim," Dosker said. Seeing that Rachmael did not comprehend he said, "A simulacrum of Ferry that of
course has no neurological system. So Ferry was never here." He tossed the arm away. "Naturally; why
should a man of his stature risk himself? He's probably sitting in his demesne satellite orbiting Mars,
viewing this through the sense-extensors of the sim." To the one-armed Ferry-construct he said harshly,
"Are we in genuine contact with you, Ferry, through this? Or is it on homeo? I 'm just curious."
The mouth of the Ferry simulacrum opened and it said, "I hear you, Dosker. Would you, as an act of
hu-manitarian kindness, administer atropine to my two THL employees?"
"It's being done," Dosker said. He walked over to Rachmael, then. "Well, our humble ship, on acute
examination, seems never to have been graced by the presence of the chairman of the board of THL."
He grinned shakily. "I feel cheated."
But the offer made by Ferry via the simulacrum, Rachmael realized.That had been genuine.
Dosker said, "Let's go to Luna, now. As your ad-visor I'm telling you—" He put his hand, gripped
harshly, on Rachmael's wrist. "Wake up. Those two will be all right, once the atropine is administered;
they won't be killed and we'll release them in their THL vehicle—minus its field, of course. You and I will
go on to Luna, to theOmphalos, as if nothing happened. Or if you won't I'll use the map the sim gave me;
I'm taking theOmphalos out into 'tween space where THL can't tail her, even if you don't want me to."
"But," Rachmael said woodenly, "something did happen. An offer was made."
"That offer," Dosker said, "proves that THL is willing to sacrifice a great deal to keep you from your
eighteen-year trip to Fomalhaut for a look at Whale's Mouth. And—" He eyed Rachmael. "Yet that
makes youless interested in getting theOmphalos out into unchartered space between planets where
Ferry's trackers can't—"
I could save theOmphalos, Rachmael thought. But the man beside him was correct; this meant of course
that he had to go on: Ferry had removed the block, had proved the need of the eighteen-year flight.
"But the deep-sleep components," he said.
"Just get me to her," Dosker said quietly, patiently. "Okay, Rachmael ben Applebaum? Will you do
that?" The controlled and very professional voice penetrated; Rachmael nodded. "I want the locus from
you, not from the chart that sim gave me; I've decided I'm not touching that. I'm waiting for you,
Rachmael, for you to decide."
"Yes," Rachmael said, then, and walked stiffly to the ship's 3-D Lunar map with its trailing arm; he
seated himself and began to fix the locus for the hard-eyed, dark, Lies Incorporated ultra-experienced



pilot.

4

At the Fox's Lair, the minute French restaurant in downtown San Diego, the maitre d' glanced at the
name which Rachmael ben Applebaum had jotted down on the sheet with its fancy, undulating,
pseudo-living letterhead and said, "Yes. Mr. Applebaum. It is—" He examined his wristwatch. "Now
eight o'clock." A line of well-cloaked people waited; it was always this way on crowded Terra: any
restaurant, even the bad ones, were overfilled each night from five o'clock on, and this was hardly a
mediocre restaurant, let alone an outright bad one. "Genet," the maitre d' called to a waitress wearing the
lace stockings and partial jacket-vest combination now popular: it left one breast, the right, exposed, and
its nipple was elegantly capped by a Swiss ornament with many minned parts; the ornament, shaped like
a large gold pencil eraser, played semi-classical music and lit up in a series of attractive shifting
light-patterns which focused on the floor ahead of her, lighting her way so that she could pass among the
closely placed tiny tables of the restaurant.
"Yes, Gaspar," the girl said, with a toss of her blonde, high-piled hair.
"Escort Mr. Applebaum to table twenty-two," the maitre d' told her, and ignored, with stoic, glacial
in-difference, the outrage among those customers lined up wearily ahead of Rachmael.
"I don't want to—" Rachmael began, but the maitre d' cut him off.
"All arranged.She is waiting at twenty-two," and, in the maitre d's voice, everything was conveyed: full
knowledge of an intricate erotic relationship which—alas—did not, at least as yet, exist.
Rachmael followed Genet, with her light-emanating useful Swiss-made nipple-assist, through the
darkness, the noise of people eating in jammed proximity, bolting their meals with the weight of guilt
hunching them, get-ting done and aside so that those waiting could be served before the Fox's Lair, at
two a.m., closed its kitchens . . . we are really pressed tight to one another, he thought, and then, all at
once, Genet halted, turned; the nipple cap now radiated a soft, delightful and warm pale red aura which
revealed, seated at table twenty-two, Freya Holm.
Seating himself opposite her, Rachmael said, "You don't light up."
"I could. And play theBlue Danube simul-taneously." She smiled; in the darkness—the waitress had
gone on, now—the dark-haired girl's eyes glowed. Before her rested a split of Buena Vista chablis,
vintage 2002, one of the great, rare treats of the restaurant, and exceeding expensive; Rachmael
wondered who would pick up the tab for this twelve-year-old Califor-nia wine; lord knew he would have
liked to, but—he reflexively touched his wallet. Freya noticed.
"Don't worry. Matson Glazer-Holliday owns this res-taurant. There will be a tab for a mere six
poscreds. For one peanut butter and grape jelly sandwich." She laughed, her dark eyes dancing in the
reflected light from barely illuminated overhead Japanese lanterns. "Does this place intimidate you?" she
asked him, then.
"No. I'm just generally tense." For six days now theOmphalos had been lost—and even to him. Perhaps



even to Matson. It could well be—necessary for security purposes—that only Al Dosker, at the
multi-stage console of the ship's controls, knew where she had gone. For Rachmael, however, it had
been psychologically devastating to watch theOmphalos blast out into the limitless darkness: Ferry had
been right—theOmphalos had been the sine qua non of Applebaum Enterprise; without her nothing
remained.
But at least this way she might return; or more ac-curately, he eventually might be taken, by Lies
In-corporated, by high-velocity flapple to her, allowed to see, board her, again, to begin his
eighteen-year trip. And, the other way—
"Don't dwell on Ferry's offer," Freya said softly. She nodded to the waitress, who placed a solidstem but
chilled wine glass before Rachmael; he automatically, obediently, poured himself a trace of the 2002
Buena Vista white, tasted it; kept himself from taking more; he merely nodded in compliment to the wine,
tried to make it appear that he was accustomed to such an outrage-ously, almost divinely penetrating
bouquet and flavor. It made absurd everything he had drunk his life long.
"I'm not thinking of it," he said to Freya. Not, he thought, in view of what you have—or are supposed to
have—in your purse.
Her large black leather mailpouch-style purse rested on the table beside her, within reach of his fingers.
"The components," Freya said softly, "are in the purse in a simulated gold round container marked
Eter-nity of Sexual Potency Fragrance #54, a routine con-tinental scent; anyone going through my
purse would expect to find it. There are twelve components, all super-min, of course. Beneath the inner
lid. On India paper, on the reverse of the label, is a wiring diagram. I will rise to my feet in a moment and
go to the powder room; after a few seconds—you must sit quietly, Rach-mael, because it is about a
seventy-thirty possibility that THL agents are monitoring us, either directly as patrons or by
instrument—you must sit; then, when I don't return immediately, you fidget, you try to attract Genet's
attention, to order some dinner for yourself or at least—and this is vital—obtain the menu."
He nodded, listening intently.
"She will notice you and give you a menu; it is quite stiff and large, since it contains the wine list. You will
place it on the table so that it covers my purse."
Rachmael said, "And I accidentally knock your purse to the floor, and the contents spill out, and in
gathering them up I—"
"Are you insane?" Quietly she said, "You cover the purse. There is a strip of titanium within the righthand
overleaf of the menu. The container of scent has a titanium-tropic ambulation-circuit; it will within two
seconds register the presence of the strip and will rotate itself out of my purse, which I've left open; it will
travel across theunderside of the menu. The strip is at the bot-tom, where your right hand with complete
naturalness will be resting as you hold what has been deliberately made up an awkward, stiff menu.
When it touches the titanium strip the container will emit a weak charge, about ten volts; you will feel this
galvanization and you will then, with your four fingers, take hold of the con-tainer, detach it from the
titanium strip to which it has tropically adhered, drop it from the underside of the menu onto your lap.
And then, with yourother hand, you will shift the container from your lap into your pocket." She rose. "I'll
be back within six minutes. Goodbye. And good luck."
He watched her go.



And then, as he sat there, he realized that he had to rise, too; had to act—the job of transferring the
deep-sleep components obtained for him from the blackmarket was difficult and delicate, because
Theodoric Ferry, ever since Lies Incorporated had taken out his satellite and its crew, its simulacrum of
Ferry himself, had kept total surveillance over everything Rachmael had done; the ultimate in
technological and personnel resources of Trails of Hoffman Limited had been brought into play,
motivated now by Theodoric's per-sonal animus.
What had been a remote and impersonal conflict had become once more, he reflected, that which it had
always been for his father: a deeply human, immediate matter. A struggle which, at last, had brought his
father's death and the disintegration of the organiza-tion.
Thinking this, Rachmael began dutifully to fidget, then rose, began hunting for the girl with the
light-emanating, gay music resounding, Swiss nipple.
"A menu, sir?" Genet stood before him, holding out the great, wonderfully printed and engraved, in fact
em-bossed, menu; he thanked her, accepted it humbly, returned to his table with the pleasant tunes of
Johann Strauss in his ears.
The menu, the size of an old-fashioned antique disc record album, easily covered Freya's purse. He sat
holding it open, reading the wine list, and especially the prices. Good god! It cost a fortune even for a
split of good wine, here. And for a fifth of a three-year-old generic white—
All the retail establishments such as the Fox's Lair were exploiting Terra's overpopulation; people who
had waited three hours to get in here to eat and drink would pay these prices—by then they had,
psychologically, no choice.
A weak electric shock made his right hand quiver; the circular container of miniaturized deep-sleep
compo-nents had already made physical contact with him and, with his fingers, he pried it, clam-like,
loose from its grip, its tropism; he dropped it into his lap, felt its weight.
As directed, he then reached for it with his left hand, to transfer it to his cloak pocket . . .
"Sorry—oops." A busboy, a robot, carrying a loaded, chest-high tray of dishes, had bumped him,
making him totter on his chair. People everywhere, those rising, those seating themselves, the robot
busboys clearing, the waitresses with their lights and tunes everywhere . . . confused, Rachmael reseated
himself, reached for the container on his lap.
It was gone.
Fallen to the floor? In disbelief he peered down, saw his shoes, the table legs, a discarded match folder.
No round gold-like container.
They had gotten it. It was they who had sent the "busboy." And now it, too, with its load of dishes, had
vanished in the general confusion.
Defeated, he sat vacantly staring. And then, at last, from the split of wine, he poured himself a second
drink, lifted the glass as if in toast: a toast to the suc-cess, admitted and accepted, of the invisible
extensions of THL around him that had, in the crucial instant, in-tervened, deprived him of what he
needed essentially in order to leave the Sol system with the bigOmphalos.
It did not matter now whether he made contact with Dosker aboard her; lacking the components it was



in-sanity to leave.
Freya returned, seated herself across from him, smiled "All okay?"
Leadenly, he said, "They stopped us. Dead." For now, anyhow, he thought. But it's not finished yet.
He drank, his heart laboring, the delicate, expensive, delicious, and utterly superfluous wine—the wine of
at least temporary utter defeat.
On the TV screen, Omar Jones, President of Newcolonizedland, highest official in residence at the great
modular settlement at Whale's Mouth, said jovially, "Well, you folks back home, all bunched together
there in those little boxes you live in—we greet you, wish you luck." The familiar, round, pleasant face
beamed its smile of warmth. "And we're just wonderin', folks, when you all are going to team up with us
and join us here at Newcolonizedland. Eh?" ****start****He cupped his ear. As if, Rachmael thought,
it were a two-way transmission. But this was illusion. This was a video tape sent across in signal-form by
way of von Einem's Telpor nexus at Schweinfort, New Whole Germany. By, through, the good offices of
the UN's network of Earth satellites, relayed to TV sets throughout Terra.
Aloud, Rachmael said, "Sorry, President Omar Jones, of Newcolonizedland, Whale's Mouth." I'll visit
you, he thought, but my own way. Not by a von Einem Telpor operating for five poscreds at one of
Trails of Hoffman's retail outlets . . . so it'll be a little while; in fact, he thought, I'd guess you, President
Jones, will be dead by the time I arrive.
Although after the defeat at the Fox's Lair—
They, the opposition had in effect severed him from his source of support from Lies Incorporated. He
had sat across from their rep, pretty, dark-haired Freya Holm, drunk vintage wine with her, chatted,
laughed. But when it came time to transfer vital components from Lies Incorporated across a five-inch
space to him . . .
The vidphone in the miniscule bedroom-cubby of his conapt saidPwannnnnnk! Indicating that someone
desired to contact him.
Shutting off the jolly face of President Omar Jones of Newcolonizedland, Whale's Mouth, he went to the
vid-phone, lifted the receiver.
On its gray, undersized screen there formed the features of Matson Glazer-Holliday. "Mr. ben
Apple-baum," Matson said.
"What can we do?" Rachmael said, feeling the weight of their loss. "In fact those people are probably
monitoring this—" "
"Oh yes; we register a tap on this vidline." Matson nodded, but he did not seem nonplussed. "We know
they're not only monitoring this call but recording it, both aud and vid. However, my message to you is
brief, and they're welcome to it. Contact the master circuit of your local public Xerox-spool library."
"And then?" Rachmael asked.
"Do research," Matson Glazer-Holliday said care-fully. "Into the original discovery of Whale's Mouth.
The first unmanned data-receptors, recorders and trans-mitters which were traveled from the Sol system,
years ago, to the Fomalhaut system; in fact, back in the twen-tieth century."



Rachmael said, "But why—"
"And we'll be in touch," Matson said briskly. "Goodbye. And glad to have—" He eyed Rachmael.
"Don't let that little incident at the restaurant get to you. It's routine. I assure you." He mock-saluted, and
then the image on the tiny colorless—the Vidphone Cor-poration of Wes-Dem provided minimal service,
and, as a public utility licensed by the UN, got away with it—the image died.
Rachmael, bewildered, hung up the aud receiver.
The records of the original unmanned monitors which had been dispatched to the Fomalhaut system
years ago were public record; what could exist there that would be of value? Nevertheless he dialed the
local branch of the New New York Xerox-spool public library.
"Send to my apt," he said, "the abstract, the com-prehensive material available, on the initial scouting of
the Fomalhaut system." By those now old-fashioned constructs which George Hoffman had utilized—by
which the habitable planet Whale's Mouth had been discovered.
Presently a robot runner appeared at his door with a variety of spools. Rachmael seated himself at his
scan-ner, inserted the first spool, noting that it was markedA General Survey of the Fomalhaut
Unmanned Inter-system Vehicle Reports, Shorter Version, by someone named G.S. Purdy.
For two hours he ran the spool. It showed that sun coming nearer and nearer, then the planets, one by
one and disappointing, bitterly so, until now number nine bloomed into view; and all at once—
No more barren rocks, unblunted mountains. No air-less, germless, hygienic void with methane as gas
or crystallized at greater astronomical units from the sun. Suddenly he saw a swaying and undulating,
blue-green frieze, and this had caused Dr. von Einem to trot out his Telpor equipment, to set up the direct
link between this world and Terra. This plum-ripe landscape had gotten Trails of Hoffman interested
commercially—and had writtenmene, mene for Applebaum Enterprise.
The last vid monitor-reading was fifteen years old. Since then direct contact via teleportation gear had
made such ancient hardware obsolete. And hence the original unmanned monitors, in orbit around
Fomal-haut—
Had what? Beenabandoned, according to author Purdy. Their batteries turned off by remote instruct;
they still, presumably, circled the sun within the orbit of Whale's Mouth.
They were still there.
And their batteries, having been off all these years, had conserved, not expended, energy. And they
were of the advanced liquid-helium III type.
Wasthis what Matson had wanted him to know?
Returning to the reference spool he ran it, ran it, again and again, until he had the datum at last. The most
sophisticated vid monitor belonged to Vidphone Corporation of Wes-Dem.They would know if it, called
Prince Albert B-y, was still in orbit around Fomalhaut.
He started toward his vidphone, then stopped. After all, it was tapped. So instead he left his conapt, left
the huge building entirely, joined a ped-runnel until he spied a public phonebooth.



There, he called the Vidphone Corporation, its cen-tral offices in Detroit, open on a
twenty-four-hour-a-day basis.
"Give me your archives," he instructed the robot switchboard.
Presently a human, wizened but efficient-looking, gnome-like official in a gray jacket, like a bookkeeper,
appeared. "Yeah?"
"I'm inquiring," Rachmael said, "as to the Prince Albert B-y mon-sat put in orb around Fomalhaut
seven-teen years ago. I'd like you to check as to whether it's still in orb and if it is, how it can be
activated so—"
The signal went dead. At the other end the Vidphone Corporation official had hung up. He waited. The
Vid-phone switchboard did not come onto the wire, nor did the regular, local robot.
I'll be darned, Rachmael thought. Shaken, he left the phonebooth.
He continued on aboard the runnel until at last he reached a second public phonebooth.
Entering he this time dialed Matson Glazer-Holliday's satellite. Presently he had the owner of Lies
Incorporated again facing him from the screen.
Carefully, Rachmael said, "Sorry to bother you. But I've been running info spools on the original
unmanned monitors of the Fomalhaut system."
"Learn anything?"
"I asked," Rachmael said, "the Vidphone Corpora-tion of Wes-Dem if its Prince Albert B-y—"
"And they said?"
Rachmael said, "They immediately cut the con."
"It," Matson said, "is still up. Still in orb."
"And sending out signals?"
"Not for fifteen years. At hyper-see it takes its signals one week to cross the twenty-four light-year gap
to the Sol system. Rather shorter than it would require for theOmphalos toreach the Fomalhaut system."
"Is there any way to once more activate the satel-lite?"
"Vidphone Corp could contact it direct, through a Telpor," Matson said. "If they wanted to."
"Do they?"
After a pause Matson said, "Did they cut you off just now?"
Pondering, Rachmael said, "Can someone else give the impulse to the satellite?"



"No. Only the Vidphone Corp knows the sequence which would cause it to respond."
"Is this what you wanted me to find out?" Rachmael asked.
Smiling, Matson Glazer-Holliday said, "Goodbye, Mr. ben Applebaum. And good luck, as you continue
your research." He then hung up, and once more Rach-mael faced a dead screen.
At his villa, Matson turned away from the vidset to Freya Holm, who perched on the couch, legs tucked
un-der her, wearing a high-fashion transparent spidersilk blue blouse and meter-reader's pants. "He
found it," Matson said. "Right away. That about the P.A. B-y sat." Pacing, Matson scowled. "All right."
He had decided. "Our rep, under the cover-name Bergen Phillips, will be sent to Whale's Mouth six
hours from now. By way of the THL outlet at Paris. As soon as he's at Whale's Mouth he'll transmit to
us, through the Telpor, an encoded document describing the true conditions." But probably THL's people
would have nabbed "Bergen Phillips" by then, and, through techniques well-known in the trade, have
learned all that the Lies Incorporated veteran knew; they would then send a faked encoded message,
assuring Matson that all was well—and he would never know, on receipt of such a message, whether it
truly emanated from "Bergen Phillips" or from THL. However—
Freya saw it, too. "Have this rep, once he's across, give the activating sequence to the P.A. B-y sat. So
it'll start transmitting data to the Sol system direct, once again."
"If,"Matson said, "Ifit still will function after fif-teen years. Andif the Vidphone Corp does not
coun-termand the instruct the moment data starts to flow in." However, he could tap the Vidphone
Corp's lines and pick up even that initial meager data. What he might ob-tain before the flow ceased
coming in might be a graphic pan-shot of Whale's Mouth—and then so what if the sat was shut off once
more.
As naturally it would be, since THL controlled the Vidphone Corp.
"Just one good vid shot," Matson said. "And we'll know."
"Know what?" She reached to set down her drink glass on the nearby antique genuine glass-topped
coffee table.
Matson said, "I'll tell you that, dear, when I see the shot." He went to the comboard, sent out the already
implemented request for the field rep who was to cross over to Whale's Mouth to be brought to his
satellite. These instructs had to be given orally andnot over lines; to line it was to howl it broadcast.
In fact perhaps he had already communicated too much to Rachmael. But—in such a business one took
risks. And he could assume that Rachmael's callback had emanated from a public booth; the man,
although an amateur, was at least cautious. And these days such caution was not paranoid; it was
practical.

On the TV screen in 3-D color with olfactory track the round, jovial features of President Omar Jones
of Newcolonizedland said, "You folks there on good old overcrowded Terra"—and, behind him, faded
in a scene of miles of open veldt-like park—"you amaze us. We hear you're going to send a ship here, by
hyper-see, and it'll arrive in . . . let's see." He pretended to be con-templating.
Before the set (not quite paid for) Jack McElhatten, a hard-working, easy-going, good-natured guy, said



to his wife, "Chrissakes, look at that open land." It reminded him of his sweet, fragile childhood, of years
ago and now gone, the Oregon Trail part of Wyoming west of Cheyenne. And the desire, the yearning,
grew in him. "We have to emigrate," he said to Ruth then. "We owe it to our kids. They can grow up
as—"
"Shh," Ruth said.
On the screen President Omar Jones of Newcolon-izedland said, "In just about eighteen years, folks,
that ship will arrive this way and park down. So here's what we've done; we've set aside November 24,
2032, as Fly-ing Dutchman Day. The day that ship reaches us." He chuckled. "I'll be, um, ninety-four
and, sorry to say, probably not here to participate in Flying Dutchman Day. But maybe posterity,
including some of you young folks—"
"You hear that?" McElhatten said to his wife, in-credulous. "Some nut is going to go the old way.
Eighteen years in 'tween space! When all you have to do—"
"BE QUIET," Ruth said, furiously, trying to listen.
"—be here to greet this Mr. Applebaum," President Omar Jones intoned in clowning solemnity.
"Banners, vox-pop streamers . . . we should have a population of between, well, say, one billion, then,
but still plenty of land. We can take up totwo billion, you know, and still leave plenty of room. So come
on and join us; cross over and be here to celebrate Flying Dutchman Day, folks." He waved, and, it
seemed to Jack McElhatten, this man at Whale's Mouth was waving directly to him. And, within him, the
yearning grew.
The frontier, he thought. Their neighbors in the tiny cramped conapt with which they shared a bathroom .
. . or had, up until last month, at which point the Pattersons had emigrated to Whale's Mouth. The vid-sig
let-ters from Jerome Patterson; god, they had raved about conditions across on the other side. If
anything, the info spots—ads, to be exact—had understated the beauty of the real-sit over there. The
beauty—and the opportu-nity.
"We needmen," President Omar Jones was declar-ing. "Good strong men who can do any kind of
work. Are you that man? Able, willing, with get-up-and-go, over eighteen years of age? Willing to start a
new life, using your mind and your hands, the skills God gave you? Think about it. What are you doing
with those hands, those skills,right now?"
Doing quality-control on an autofac line, McElhatten thought to himself bitterly; a job which a pigeon
could do better; fact was, a pigeon did do so, to checkhis work.
"Can you imagine," he said to his wife, "holding down a job where a pigeon has a better eye than you for
mis-tolerances?" And that was exactly his situation; he ejected parts which were not properly aligned,
and, when he missed, the pigeon noted the miss, the defective part allowed to pass: it picked out the
misaligned part, pecked a reject-button which kicked the part from the moving belt. And, as they quit
and emigrated, the quality control men at Krino Associates were, one by one, replaced by pigeons.
He stayed on now, really, only because the union to which he belonged was strong enough to insist that
his seniority made it mandatory for Krino to keep him on. But once he quit, once he left—
"Then," he said to Ruth, "the pigeon moves in. Okay, let it; we're going across to Whale's Mouth, and
from then on I won't be competing with birds." Com-peting, he thought, and losing. Offering my
employers the poorer showing. "And Krino will be glad," he said, with misery.



"I just wish," Ruth said, "that you hada particular job lined up over there at Newcolonizedland. I mean,
they talk about 'all the jobs,' but you can't take 'all the jobs.' What one job are you—" She hesitated.
"Skilled for?" After all, he had worked for Krino Associates for ten years.
"I'm going to farm."
She stared at him.
"They'llgive us twenty acres. We'll buy sheep here, those black-faced ones. Suffolk. Take six across,
five ewes and a ram, put up fences, build ourselves a house out of prefab sections—" He knew he could
do it. Others had, as they had described—not in impersonal ads—but in letters vid-signaled back and
then tran-scribed by the Vidphone Corporation and posted on the bulletin board of the conapt building.
"But if we don't like it," Ruth murmured apprehen-sively, "we won't be able to come back; I mean, that
seems so strange. Those teleportation machines . . . working one way only."
"The extra-galactic nebulae," he said patiently. "The recession of matter outward; the universe is
exploding, growing; the Telpor relates your molecules as energy configurations in this outflow—"
"I don't understand," Ruth said. "But I do know this," she said, and, from her purse, brought a leaflet.
Studying the leaflet, McElhatten scowled. "Cranks. This is hate literature, Ruth. Don't accept it." He
began to crumple it up.
"They don't call themselves by a hating name. 'Friends of a United People.' They're a small group of
worried, dedicated people, opposed to—"
"I know what they're opposed to," McElhatten said. Several of them worked at Krino Associates. "They
say we Terrans should stay within the Sol system. Stick together. Listen." He crumpled up the leaflet.
"The history of man has been one vast migration. This to Whale's Mouth; it's the greatest
yet—twenty-four light-years! We ought to be proud." But naturally there'd be a few idiots and cranks
opposing history.
Yes, it was history and he wanted to be part of it. First it had been New England, then Australia,
Alaska, and then the try—and failure—on Luna, then on Mars and Venus, and now—success. At last.
And if he waited too long he would be too old and there would be too many expatriates so free land
would no longer be avail-able; the government at Newcolonizedland might with-draw its land offer any
time, because after all, every day people streamed over. The Telpor offices were swamped.
"You want me to go?" he asked Ruth. "Go first—and send a message back, once I have the land and
am ready to begin building? And then you and the kids can come?"
Nervously, she said, "I hate to be parted from you."
"Make up your mind."
"I guess," she said, "we should go together. If we go at all. But these—letters. They're just impulses onto
energy lines."
"Like telephone or vidphone or telegraph or TV mes-sages. Has been for one hundred years."



"If onlyreal letters came back."
"You have," he said, derisively, "a superstitious fear."
"Maybe so," Ruth admitted. But it was a real fear nonetheless. A deep and abiding fear of a one-way
trip from which they could never return, except, she thought, eighteen years from now, when that ship
reaches the Fomalhaut system.
She picked up the evening 'pape, examined the article, jeering in tone, about this ship, theOmphalos.
Capable of transporting five hundred, but this time carrying one sole man: the ship's owner. And, the
article said, he was fleeing to escape his creditors; that was his motive.
But, she thought,he can come back from Whale's Mouth.
She envied—without understanding why—that man. Rachmael ben Applebaum, the 'pape said. If we
could cross over now with you, she thought, if we asked—
Her husband said quietly, "If you won't go, Ruth,I'm going alone. I'm not going to sit there day after day
at that quality-control station, feeling that pigeon breathing down the back of my neck."
She sighed. And wandered into the common kitchen which they shared with their righthand neighbors,
the Shorts, to see if there was anything left of their monthly ration of what the bill of lading called cof-bz.
Synthetic coffee beans.
There was not. So, instead, she morosely fixed herself a cup of synthetic tea. Meanwhile, the
Shorts—who were noisy—came and went, in and out of the kitchen. And, in her living room, her
husband sat before the TV set, an enraptured child, listening to, following with devout and absorbed full
attention the nightly report from Whale's Mouth. Watching the new, the next, world.
I guess, she thought, he's right.
But something deep and instinctive within her still objected. And she wondered queerly why. And she
thought, then, once more of Rachmael ben Applebaum, who, the 'pape said, was attempting the
eighteen-year tripwithout deep-sleep equipment; he had tried and failed to obtain it, the 'pape said
gleefully; the guy was so marginal an operator, such a fly-by-nighter, that he had no credit, pos or
otherwise. The poor man, she thought. Conscious and alone for eighteen whole years; couldn't the
company that makes those deep-sleep unitsdonate the equipment he needs?
The TV set in the living room declared, "Remember, folks, it's Old Mother Hubbard there on Terra, and
the Old Woman who lived in a shoe; you've got so many children, folks, and just what do you plan to
do?"
Emigrate, Ruth decided, without enthusiasm. Appar-ently.
And—soon.

5



Against Rachmael ben Applebaum's tiny flapple the great hull of his one asset of economic value—and
that attached through the courts—bumped in the darkness, and at once automatic mechanisms came into
operation. A hatch whined open; inner locks shut and then retired as air passed into vacuum and
replaced it, and, on his console, a green light lit. A good one.
He could safely pass from his meager rented flapple into theOmphalos, as it hung in powerless orbit
around Mars at .003 astronomical units.
Directly he had crossed through the lock-series—without use of a pressure suit or oxygen gear—Al
Dosker said to him, eying him and with laser pistol in hand, "I thought it might be a simulacrum, supplied
by THL. But the EEG and EKG machines say you're not." He held out his hand; and Rachmael shook.
"So you're making the trip anyhow, without the deep-sleep components. And you think, after eighteen
years, you'll be sane? I wouldn't be." His dark, sharp-cut face was filled with compassion. "Can't you
induce some fray to come along? One other person, and what a difference, especially if she's—"
"And quarrel," Rachmael said, "and wind up with one corpse. I'm taking an enormous edu-tape library;
by the time I reach Fomalhaut I'll be speaking Attic Greek, Latin, Russian, Italian—I'll be reading
alchem-ical texts from the Middle Ages and Chinese classics in the original from the sixth century." He
smiled, but it was an empty, frozen smile; he was not fooling Dosker, who knew what it was like to try an
inter-system run without deep-sleep. Because Dosker had made the three-year-trip to Proxima. And, on
the journey back, had insisted, from his experience, on deep-sleep.
"What gets me," Rachmael said, "is that THL has gotten to the blackmarket. That they're even able to
dry up illegal supplies of minned parts." But—the chance had been missed in the restaurant; the
components had been within reach, five thousand poscreds' worth. And—that was that.
"You know," Dosker said slowly, "that one of Lies Incorporated's experienced field reps is crossing,
using a regular Telpor terminal, like the average fella. So we may be contacting theOmphalos within the
next week; you may be able to turn back; we may save you the eighteen years going, and, or have you
forgotten, the eighteen years returning?"
"I'm not sure," Rachmael said, "if I make it I'll come back." He was not fooling himself; after the trip to
Fomalhaut he might be physically unable to start back—whatever conditions obtained at Whale's Mouth
he might stay there because hehad to. The body had its limits. So did the mind.
Anyhow they now had more to go on. Not only the failure of the old time capsule ever to reach the Sol
system—and conveniently forgotten by the media—but the Vidphone Corporation of Wes-Dem's
absolute refusal, under direct, legal request by Matson Glazer-Holliday, to reactivate its Prince Albert
B-y satellite orbiting Fomalhaut. This one fact alone, Rachmael re-flected, should have frightened the
rational citizen. But—
The people did not know. The media had not re-ported it.
Matson, however, had leaked the info to the small, militant, anti-emigration org, the Friends of a United
People. Mostly they were old-fashioned, elderly and fearful, whose distrust of emigration by means of
Telpor was based on neurotic reasons. But—they did print pamphlets. And Vidphone Corp's refusal had
duly been noted immediately in one of their Terra-wide broad-sheets.
But how many persons had seen it—that Rachmael did not know. He had the intuition, however, that



very few people had. And—emigration continued.
As Matson said, the footprints leading into the predator's lair continued to increase in number. And still
none led out.
Dosker said, "All right, I am now officially, formally surrendering theOmphalos back to you. She
appears to check out through every system, so you should have nothing to fear." His dark eyes glinted. "I
tell you what, ben Applebaum. During your eighteen years of null-deep-sleep you can amuse yourself as
I've been, during the last week." He reached to a table, picked up a leather-backed book. "You can," he
said quietly, "keep a diary."
"Of what?"
"Of a mind," Dosker said, "deteriorating. It'll be of psychiatric interest." Now he did not seem to be
joking.
"So even you," Rachmael said, "consider me—"
"Without deep-sleep equipment to drop your metab-olism you're making a terrible mistake to go. So
maybe the diary won't be a transcript of human deterioration; maybe that's already taken place."
Wordlessly, Rachmael watched the dark, lithe man step through the lock, disappear, out of the
Omphalos and into the tiny rented flapple.
The lock clanged shut. A red light flicked on above it and he was alone, here in this, his giant passenger
liner, as he would be for eighteen years and maybe, hethought, maybe Dosker is right.
But still he intended to make the trip.
At three o'clock a.m. Matson Glazer-Holliday was awakened by one of his staff of automatic villa
servants. "Your lord, a message from a Mr. Bergen Phillips. From Newcolonizedland. Just received. And
you asked—"
"Yes." Matson sat up, spilling the covers from Freya, who slept on; he grabbed his robe, slippers. "Let's
have it."
The message, typed out by routine printers of the Vid-phone Corp, read:
BOUGHT MY FIRST ORANGE TREE. LOOKS LIKE A BIG CROP.
COME ON JOIN MOLLY AND ME.
Now Freya stirred, sat up; her spider silk nightgown, one strap of it, slipped from her bare, pale
shoulder. "What is it?" she murmured.
"The first encoded note from B.P.," Matson said; he absently tap-tapped the folded message against his
knee, pondering.
She sat up fully, reached for her pack of Bering cigarillos. "What does he report, Mat?"
Matson said, "The message is version six."



"That—things are exactly as depicted." She was wide awake now; she sat lighting her cigarillo, watching
him intently.
"Yes. But—THL psychologists, waiting on the far side, could have nabbed the field rep. 'Washed his
brain, gotten everything and then sent this; so it meant nothing. Only a transmission of one of the
odd-num-bered codes—indicating in various degrees that condi-tions at Whale's Mouth were not as
depicted—would have been worth anything. Because of course THL psy-chologists would have no
motive to fakethose. "
"So," Freya said, "you know nothing."
"But maybe he can activate the Prince Albert B-y sat." One week; it would not be long, and the
Om-phalos could easily be contacted by then. And, since its solo pilot did not lie in deep-sleep, he could
be in-formed.
However, if after a week—
"If no data come from the sat," Matson said thoughtfully, "it still proves nothing. Because then Bergen
will transmit messagen, meaning that the sat has proved inoperative.They will do all that, too, if they have
him. So still nothing!" He paced about the bedroom, then took the burning cigarillo from the girl in the
rumpled bed, inhaled from it violently, until it heated up and scorched his fingers. "I," he said, "will not live
out eighteen years." I will never live to know the truth about Whale's Mouth, he realized. That time
period; it was just too long to wait.
"You'll be seventy-nine," Freya said practically. "So you'll still be alive. But ajerrywith artiforgs for
natural organs."
But—I'm just not that patient, Matson realized. A newborn baby grows virtually to adulthood in that
time!
Freya retrieved the cigarillo, winced at its tem-perature. "Well, possibly you can send over—"
"I'm going over," Matson said.
Staring at him, after a moment she said, "Oh god. God."
"I won't go alone. I'll have a 'family.' At every outlet of Trails of Hoffman a Lies Incorporated
commando team—" He possessed two thousand of them, many veterans of the war; they would pass
over at the same moment as he, would link up at Whale's Mouth. And, in their "personal" gear, they
would convey enough detection, relay, recording and monitoring equipment to reestablish the private
police agency. "So you're in charge here on Terra," he told Freya. "Until I get back." Which would be
thirty-six years from now, he thought acidly. When I'm ninety-seven years old . . . no, that's right: we can
obtain deep-sleep mechanisms at Whale's Mouth because I remember them taking it across; that's one
reason why it's so short of supply, here. Originally it was thought that if colonization didn't work they
could vacate—roanoke,they called it—they could roanoke back to the Sol system in deep-sleep by ship
. . . from giant liners manufactured at Whale's Mouth from prefab sections passed across by von Einem's
Telpor teleportation gates.
"A coup," Freya said, then. "In fact—acoup d'etat."



Startled, he said, "What? God no; I never—"
"If you take two thousand top reps," Freya said, "Lies Incorporated won't exist here; it'll be a shade. But
over there—it'll be formidable. And the UN has no army at Whale's Mouth, Matson. You're aware of
that, at least on an unconscious level. Who could oppose you? Let's see. The President of Newcolonized
land, Omar Jones, is up for reelection in two years; you'd possibly want to wait—"
"At the first call from Whale's Mouth," Matson said harshly, "Omar Jones could have UN troops trotting
through every Telpor instrument in the world. And their tactical weapons with them, everything up to
cephalo-tropic missiles." And he hated—and feared—those.
"Ifacall came from Whale's Mouth. But once you're on the other side, you could handle that.You could
be sure no such emergency announcement was sent out. Isn't that what we've been discussing all this
time? Isn't this really why you bought Rachmael's idea—your knowledge that all communication from the
other side can be—managed?"She waited, smoking, watching him with a feminine vigil of intensity and
acuity.
Presently he said tightly, "Yes. We could do that. They may have THL psychologists armed and ready
for individuals. But not for two thousand trained police. We'd have control in half an hour—probably.
Unless, unknown to us, Horst Bertold has been sending troops across." And, he pondered, why should
he? All they face—up to now—is bewildered citizens, expatriates who want jobs, homes, new roots . . .
in a world they can't leave.
"And remember this, too," Freya said. She lifted the strap of her nightgown once more, then, covering
her faintly freckled shoulder. "The receiving portion of the teleportation rig has to be spacially installed;
every one of those over there had to be sent originally by inter-stellar hyper-see ship, and that took
years. So you can stop the UN and Bertold just by rendering the receiving stations of the Telpors
inoperative—if they suspect."
"Andif Ican move quickly enough."
"But you," she said calmly, "can. Taking your best men, with their equipment . . . unless—" She paused,
licked her lip, as if puzzling out a purely academic problem.
Maddened, he said, "Unless what, goddam it?"
"They may identify your reps as they cross. And you. They may be ready. I can see it now." She laughed
mer-rily. "You pay your poscreds, smile at the nice THL bald-headed, gargoyle-like New Whole
Germany techni-cians who run those Telpors, you stand there while they subject your body to the field of
the equipment . . . keep standing there innocently, fade away, reappear twenty-four light-years away at
Whale's Mouth . . . and are lasered dead before you're even fully formed. It takes fifteen minutes. For
fifteen minutes, Mat, you would be helpless, half materialized both here and there. And all your field reps.
And all their gear."
He glared at her.
"Thus," she said, "goeshubris. "
"What's that?"
"The Greek word for 'pride.' For trying to rise above the station the gods have allocated you. Maybe the



gods don't want you to seize control of Whale's Mouth, Matty darling. Maybe the gods don't want you
to over-reach your self."
"Hell," he said, "as long as I have to go across anyhow—"
"Sure; then whynot take control? Push jovial, in-sipid Omar Jones aside? After all . . ." She stubbed out
her cigarillo. "You'd be doomed to stay there anyhow; why live the ordinary life with the ordinaryhoi
polloi? Here, you're strong . . . but Horst Bertold and the UN, with Trails of Hoffman as their economic
support,are stronger. Over there—" She shrugged, as if made weary by human aspirations—or human
vanity. Over there it was simply a different situation.
No one, he realized, could compete if he managed to move, in one sudden swoop, his entire entourage
and weaponry across . . . using, ironically, von Einem's own official retail stations themselves. He grinned
at that; it amused him to think that THL would personally see to it that he and his veteran reps reached
Newcolonized-land.
"And then in 2032," Freya said, "when Rachmael ben Applebaum, probably an unwashed, bearded,
mumbling hebephrenic schizophrenic by then, shows up in his great and good ship theOmphalos, he'll
discover it's a hell, there, exactly as he anticipated . . . but it'll beyou who'll be running it. And I'll betthat
will surprise him more than a little."
Nettled, he said, "I can't think about it any more. I'm going back to sleep." He removed his robe and
slip-pers, got wearily into the bed, aware of his years; he felt old. Wasn't he too decrepit for something
like this? Not getting into bed; lord, he wasn't too old to clamber in beside Freya Holm, not yet, anyhow.
But too old for what Freya had proposed—what she had correctly, possibly even telepathically,
ascertained from his un-conscious mind. Yes, it was actually true.
He had, from Rachmael's initial vidphone call, at the back levels of his cognition-processes, pondered
this, from the very beginning.
Andthis was his reason for assisting—or rather trying to assist—the morose, creditor-balloon-hounded
Rach-mael ben Applebaum.
He thought, according to published info there is a home army, so-called, at Whale's Mouth, of three
hun-dred volunteer citizens. For use as a sort of national guard in case of a riot. Three hundred! And
none of them professionals, with experience. It was a pastoral land, the ads explained. A G. of E. lacking
a snake; since there was a super-abundance of everything for everyone, what was an army needed for?
What have-not existed to envy what have? And what reason to try, by force, to seize his holdings?
I'll tell you, Matson Glazer-Holliday thought. The have-nots are here on this side. Myself and those who
work for me; we're gradually, over the years, being ground down and overpowered by the true titans, by
the UN and THL and—
The haves are across twenty-four light-years in the Fomalhaut system, at its ninth planet.
Mr. ben Applebaum, he thought to himself as he lay supine, drew, from reflex, Freya Holm against him,
you will have quite a surprise when you get to Whale's Mouth.
It was a pity that he himself—and he intuited this with certitude—would not be alive at that date.
As towhy not, however, his near-Psionic intuition told him nothing.



Beside him Freya moaned in her half-sleep, settled close to him, relaxed.
He, however, lay awake, staring into the nothingness. Deep in a new, hard thought. The like of which he
had never experienced before.

6

The monitoring and recording-transmitting satellite, Prince Albert B-y, creaked out its first video signal, a
transcript of the first video telescopic records which it had taken of the surface beneath it in over a
decade. Portions of the long-inert network of minned parts failed; backup systems, however, took over,
and some of these failed, too. But the signal, directed toward the Sol system twenty-four light-years
away, was sent out.
And, on the surface of Fomalhaut IX, an eye winked. And from it a ground-to-air missile rose and in a
period so slight that only the finest measuring devices could have detected a lapse-period at all, arrived at
its target, the groaning carrot-shaped monitoring satellite which had, inoperative, silently existed—and
hence harm-lessly. Up to now.
The warhead of the missile detonated. And the Prince Albert B-y ceased to exist, soundlessly, because
at its altitude there was no atmosphere to transmit the event in the dimension of noise.
And, at the same time on the surface below, a power-ful transmitter accepted a tape run at enormous
velocity; the signal, amplified by a row of cold, superbly built surge-gates, reached transmission level and
was re-leased; oddly, its frequency coincided with that of the signal just emitted by the now nonexistent
satellite.
What would radiate from the two separate transmit-ters would blend in a cacophony of meaningless
garble. Satisfied, the technicians operating the ground transmit-ter switched to more customary
channels—and tasks.
The deliberately deranged combined signal sped across space toward the Sol system, beamed, in its
mad confusion, at a planet which, when it received this, would possess nothing but a catfight of noise.
And the satellite, reduced to its molecular level by the warhead, would emit no more signals; its life was
over.
The event, the first transmission by the satellite up unto the final scramble by the far more powerful
sur-face transmitter, had consumed five minutes, including the flight—and demolition—of the missile: the
missile and its priceless, elaborate, never-to-be-duplicated tar-get.
—A target which, certain circles had long ago agreed in formal session, could be readily sacrificed, were
the need to arise.
That need had arisen.
And the satellite was duly gone.



At the site of the missile-launching a helmeted soldier leisurely fitted a second g.-to-a. missile into the
barn, at-tached both its anode and cathode terminals, made sure that the activating board was
relocked—by the same key through which he had obtained official entry—and then he, too, returned to
his customary chores.
Time lapse: perhaps six minutes in all.
And the planet, Fomalhaut IX, revolved on.

Deep in thought as she sat in the comfortable leather, padded seat of the luxury taxi flapple, Freya Holm
was startled by the sudden mechanical voice of the vehicle's articulation-circuit. "Sir or madam, I request
your par-don, but a deterioration of my meta-battery forces me without choice to land for a quick-charge
without delay.
Please give me oral permission as an acknowledgment of your willingness otherwise we will glide to
destruct."
Looking down she saw the high-rise spires of New New York, the ring of city outside the inner, old
kremlin of New York itself. Late for work, she said to herself, damn it. But—the flapple was correct; if
its meta-battery, its sole power supply, were failing, to get out of the sky and on the surface at a repair
station was man-datory; a long powerless glide would mean death in the form of collision with one of the
tall commercial build-ings below. "Yes," she agreed, resignedly, and groaned. And today was the day.
"Thank you, sir or madam." With sputtering power the flapple spiraled down until at last, under adequate
control, it coasted to a rather rough but at least not dangerous halt at one of New New York's infinite
flapple service stations.
A moment later uniformed service station men swarmed over the parked flapple, searching for—as one
explained courteously to her—for the short which had depleted the meta-battery, good normally, the
attendant told her cheerfully, for twenty years.
Opening the flapple door the attendant said, "May I check under the passenger's console, please? The
wiring there; those circuits take a lot of hard use—the insula-tion may be rubbed off." He, a black man,
seemed to her pleasant and alert and without hesitation she moved to the far side of the cab.
The attendant slid in, closed, then, the flapple door. "Moon and cow," he said, the current—and highly
temporary—ident-code phrase of members of the police organization Lies Incorporated.
Taken by surprise Freya murmured, "Jack Horner. Who are you? I never ran into you before." He did
not look like a field rep to her.
"A 'tween space pilot. I'm Al Dosker; I know you—you're Freya Holm." He was not smiling now; he
was quiet, serious, and, as he sat beside her, per-functorily running his fingers over the wiring of the
passenger's control console he said, half chantingly, "I have no time, Freya, for small talk; I have five
minutes at the most; I know where the short is because I sent this particular flapple taxi to pick you up.
See?"
"I see," she said, and, within her mouth, bit on a false tooth; the tooth split and she tasted the bitter



outer-layer of a plastic pill: a container of Prussic acid, enough to kill her if this man proved to be from
their antagonists. And, at her wrist, she wound her watch—actually winding a low-velocity homeostatic
cyanide-tipped dart which she would control by the "watch" controls; it could either take out this man or,
if others showed up, herself, in case of a failure of the oral poison. In any case she sat back rigid, waiting.
"You," Dosker said, "are Matson's mistress; you have access to him at any time; this I know—this is
why I've approached you. Tonight, at six p.m. New New York time, Matson Glazer-Holliday will arrive
at an outlet of Trails of Hoffman; carrying two heavy suit-cases he will request permission to emigrate. He
will pay his six poscreds, or seven, if his baggage is overweight, and then be teleported to Whale's
Mouth. And at the same time, at every Telpor outlet throughout Terra, a total aggregate of roughly two
thousand of his toughest veteran field reps will do the same."
She said nothing; she stared straight ahead. Within her purse an aud recorder captured all this, but
heaven only knew for what.
Dosker said, "On the far side he, by deploying his veterans and the wep-equipment which they will
as-semble from components carried in their suitcases as 'personal articles,' will attempt a coup. Will halt
emi-gration, make at once inoperative the Telpors, toss President Omar Jones—"
"So?" she said. "If I know this, why tell me?"
"Because," Dosker said, "I am going to Horst Ber-told two hours before six. I believe that is usually
con-sidered four o'clock." His voice was icy, harsh. "I am an employee of Lies Incorporated but I did
not join the organization to participate in a powerplay like this. On Terra, Matson G.-H. stands about
where he ought to be: third in the pecking order. On Whale's Mouth—"
"And you want me," Freya said, "to do exactly what between now and four o'clock? Seven hours."
"Inform Matson that when he and the two thousand LI field reps arrive at the retail outlets of THL they
will not be teleported but will be arrested and undoubtedly painlessly murdered. In the German manner."
"This,"she said, "is what you want? Matson dead and them, those—" She gestured, gripping, clawing
the air. "Bertold and Ferry and von Einem to run the cor-porate Terran-Whale's Mouth
political-economic entity with no one to—"
"I don't want him to try."
"Listen," Freya said bitingly. "The coup that Mat-son expects to carry out at Whale's Mouth is based on
his assumption that a home army of three hundred ignorant volunteers exists over there. I don't think you
have to worry; the problem is that Mat actuallybelieves the lies he sees on TV; he's actually incredibly
primitive and naive. Doyou think it's a Promised Land over there, with a tiny volunteer army, waiting for
someone to come along withreal force, aided by modern wep-technology, such as Mat possesses, to
harvest for the asking? If this were so, do you honestly believe Bertold and Ferrywould not have done
it already?"
Dosker, disconcerted, eyed her hesitantly.
"I think," she said, "that Mat is making a mistake. Not because it's immoral but because he's going to
discover that, once he's over there, he and his two thousand veterans, he'll be facing—" She broke off. "I
don't know. But he won't succeed in anycoup d'etat. Whoever runs Newcolonizedland will handle Mat;
that's what terrifies me. Sure, I'd like him to stop; I'd be glad to tell him that one of his top employees



who knows all the inside details about the coup is going to, at four p.m., tip off the authorities. I'll do
everything in my power, Dosker, to get him to abandon the idea, to face the fact that he's wandering
idiotically into a ter-minal trap. My reasons and yours may not—"
"What do you think," Dosker said, "is over there, Freya?"
"Death."
"For—everybody?" He stared at her. "Forty mil-lion? Why?"
"The days," she said, "of Gilbert and Sullivan and Jerome Kern are over. We're on a planet of seven
bil-lion. Whale's Mouth could do the job, but slowly, and there's a more efficient way, and every one of
those in key posts in the UN, put in by Herr Horst Bertold, knows that way."
"No," Dosker said, his face an ugly, putty-colored gray. "That went out in 1945."
"Are you sure? Wouldyou want to emigrate?"
He was silent. And then, stunning her, he said, "Yes."
"What? Why?"
Dosker said, "I will emigrate. Tonight at six, New New York time. With laser pistol in my left hand, and
I'll kick them in the groin; I want to get at them, if that's what they're doing; I can't wait."
"You won't be able to do a thing. As soon as you emerge—"
"With my bare hands. I'll getone of them. Any one will do."
"Start here. Start with Horst Bertold."
He stared at her, then.
"We have the wep-techs," Freya said, and then ceased speaking as the flapple door was opened by
another—cheerful—attendant.
"Found the short, Al?" he asked.
"Yes," Al Dosker said. He fooled, fumbled, under the dashboard, his face concealed. "Should be okay
now. Recharge the meta-bat, stick it back in, and she can take off."
The other attendant, satisfied, departed. Freya and Al Dosker were alone once more, briefly, with the
flapple door hanging open.
"You—may be wrong," Dosker said.
Freya said, "It's got to be something like that. It can't be three hundred assorted-shape volunteer army
privates, because Ferry and Bertold or at leastone of them would have moved in, and that's the one fact
we know:we know what they're like. There just cannot, Dosker, be a power vacuum at Whale's
Mouth."



"All ready to go, miss," one of the other attendants called.
The flapple's articulation-circuit asserted, "I feel a million times better; I'm now prepared to depart for
your original destination, sir or madam, as soon as the superfluous individual has disemflappled."
Dosker, trembling, said, "I—don't know what to do."
"Don't go to Ferry or Bertold. Begin at that."
He nodded. Evidently she had reached him; that part was over.
"Mat will need all the help he can get," she said, "from six o'clock on. From the moment his first field rep
hits Whale's Mouth. Dosker, why don't you go? Even if you're a pilot, not a rep. Maybe you can help
him."
The flapple started its motor up irritably. "Please, sir or madam, if you will request—"
"Are you teleporting?" Dosker asked her. "With them?"
Freya said, "I'm scheduled to cross at five. To rent living quarters for Mat and me. I'll be—remember
this so you can find us—Mrs. Silvia Trent. And Mat will be Stuart Trent. Okay?"
"Okay," Dosker mumbled, backed out, shut the flapple door.
The flapple began to ascend, at once.
And she relaxed. And spat out the capsule of Prussic acid, dropped it into the disposal chute of the
flapple, then reset her "watch."
What she had said to Dosker, god knew, was the truth. She knew it—knew it and could do nothing to
dissuade Matson. On the far side professionals would be in wait, and even if they didn't anticipate the
coup, even if there had been no leak and they saw no connection between the two thousand male
individuals scattered all over the world, applying at every Telpor outlet on Terra . . . even so, she knew
they would be able to handle Mat. He was just not that big and theycould handle him.
Buthe did not believe it. Because Mat saw the possi-bility of power; it was a gaff that had hooked deep
in his side and the wound spilled with the blood of yearning. Suppose it was true; suppose only a
three-hundred-man army existed.Suppose. The hope and possibility enflamed him.
And babies, she thought, as the flapple carried her toward the New New York offices of Lies
Incorporated, are discovered under cabbages.
Sure, Mat; you keep on believing.

7

To the pleasant, rather overextensively bos-omed young female receptionist Matson Glazer-Holli-day



said, "My name is Stuart Trent. My wife was teleported earlier today, so I'm anxious to slip in under the
wire; I know you're about to close your office."
She glanced searchingly at him, at this bald-headed man with his prominent ridge-bones above his dark,
almost pain-haunted eyes. "You're certain, Mr. Trent, that you desire to—"
"My wife," he repeated harshly. "She's already over—she left at five." He added, "I have two suitcases.
A leady is bringing them." And, into the office of Trails of Hoffman, strode the robot-like machine,
bearing the two genuine cowhide bulging suitcases.
The consummately nubile receptionist said, "Please fill out these forms, Mr. Trent. I'll make certain that
the Telpor techs are ready to receive one more, because, as you say, we are about to close." The
entrance gate, in fact, was now locked.
He made out the forms, feeling only a coldness, an empty, mindless—fear. Lord, it really was fear! He
ac-tually, at this late moment, when Freya had already been teleported across to Whale's Mouth, felt his
autonomic nervous system secrete its hormones of cringing panic; he wanted to back out.
However, he managed to fill out the forms anyhow. Because, higher than the autonomic nervous system,
was the frontal lobe's awareness that the moment Freya crossed over,it was decided.
In fact, that was his reason for sending her in ad-vance; he knew his own irresolution. He had made her
the cat's paw of that irresolution; by having her go he forced himself to complete this. And, he thought,
for the best; we must find some way, in life, to overcome ourselves . . . we're our own worst enemies.
"Your shots, Mr. Trent." A THL nurse stood by with needles. "Will you please remove your outer
gar-ments?" The nurse pointed to a small and hygienic back chamber; he entered, began removing his
clothing.
Presently he had received his shots; his arms ached and he wondered dully ifthey had done it already.
Had this been something fatal, administered over the cover of prophylactic shots?
Two elderly German technicians, both as bald as doorknobs—as himself—all at once manifested
them-selves, wearing the goggles of Telpor operators; the field itself, if viewed too long, caused
permanent destruction of the retina. "Mein Herr," the first technician said briskly, "kindly, sir, remove the
balance of your garb.Sie sollen ganz unbedeckt sein. We wish not material, no sort, to impede the
Starkheit of the field. All objects, including your parcels, will follow you within minutes." Matson finished
undressing, and, terrified, followed them down a tiled hall to what suddenly loomed as a mammoth
chamber, almost barren; he saw in it no elaborate Dr. Frankenstein hodgepodge of retorts and bubbling
caldrons, only the twin perpendicular poles, like the concrete walls of a good tennis court, covered with
circular cuplike terminals; between the poles he would stand, a mute ox, and the surge of the field would
pass from pole to pole, engulfing him. And he would either die—if they knew who he was—or if not,
then he would be gone from Terra for the balance of his life, or at least thirty-six years which for him was
the same.
Lord god, he thought. I hope Freya got by all right. Anyhow the short encoded message signifying
everything all right had arrived from her.
"Mr. Trent," one of the technicians said, fitting his goggles in place,"bitte; please look down so that your
eyes do not perceive the field-emanations;Sie versteh 'n the retinal hazard."



"Okay," he said, nodding, and looked down, then, in almost a gesture of modesty, raised one arm,
touched his bare chest with one hand, as if concealing him-self—protecting himself against what suddenly
became a stunning, blinding ram-head that butted him simultaneously from both sides; the forces,
absolutely equal, made him freeze, as if poured as a polyester as he stood; anyone watching would have
thought him free to move, but he was ensnared for good by the surge passing from anode to cathode,
with himself as—what, the ion ring? His body attracted the field; he felt it in-fuse him as a dissolving
agent.
And then the left surge dropped; he staggered, glanced up involuntarily.
The two bald, goggled Reich technicians were gone. He was in a far smaller chamber, and one elderly
man sat at a desk, carefully logging from numbered tags a huge mound of suitcases and wrapped, tied
parcels.
"Your clothing," the official said, "lies in a metal basket to your right marked 121628. And if you're faint,
there's a cot; you may lie down."
"I'm—all right," Matson Glazer-Holliday said, and made his way unsteadily to his clothing; he dressed,
then stood uncertainly.
"Here are your two items of luggage," the bureaucrat at the desk said, without looking up. "Numbers
39485 and 39486. Please arrange to remove them from the premises." He then examined his wristwatch.
"No, ex-cuse me. No one will be following you from the New New York nexus; take your time."
"Thanks." Matson himself picked up the heavy suit-cases, walked toward a large double door. "Is this,"
he asked, "the right direction?"
"That will take you out on Laughing Willow Tree Avenue," the clerk informed him.
"I want a hotel."
"Any surface vehicle can transport you." The clerk returned to his work, broke contact; he had no more
info to offer.
Pushing the door open, Matson stepped out onto the sidewalk.
He saw gray barracks.
Beside him. Freya appeared. The air was cold; she shivered and he, too, quaked, drew against her,
stared and stared at the barracks; he saw row after row of them, and—charged, twelve-foot-high wire
fences with four strands of barbed wire at the top. And signs. The posted restrictive notices; he did not
even need to read them.
Freya said, "Mat, have you ever heard of a town called Sparta?"
" 'Sparta,' " he echoed, standing holding his two suitcases.
"Here." She released his fingers, set the suitcases down. A few people, drably dressed, slunk by, silently,
carefully paying no attention to them. "I was wrong," Freya said. "And the message of course to you, the
all-clear, was spurious. Mat, I thought—"



"You thought," he said, "it was going to be—ovens."
She said, with quiet calmness, tossing her heavy dark mane of hair back and raising her chin to meet his
gaze, look at him face-to-face, "It's work camps. The Soviet, not the Third Reich, model. Forced labor."
"Doing what? Clearing the planet? But the original authentic monitoring satellites reported that—"
"They seem," she said, "to be forming the nucleus of an army. First starting everyone out in labor gangs.
To get them accustomed to discipline. The young males go into basic training at once; the rest of
us—we'll probably serve inthat." She pointed and he saw the ramp of a subsurface structure; he saw the
descent mechanism and he knew, remembered from his youth, what it meant, this pre-war configuration.
A multi-level autofac. On continuous schedule, hencenot entirely homeo. For round-the-clock
operations, machines would not do, could not survive. Only shifts, alternating, of humans, could keep the
belts moving; they had learned that in '92.
"Your police vets," Freya said, "are too old for im-mediate induction; most of them. So they'll be
assigned to barracks, as we will be. I have the number they gave you and the one they gave me."
"Different quarters? We're not eventogether?"
Freya said, "I also have the mandatory forms for us to fill out; we list all our skills. So we can be useful."
"I'm old, "he said.
"Then," Freya said, "you'll have to die. Unless you can conjure up a skill."
"I have one skill." In the suitcase resting on the pavement beside him he had a transmitter which, small as
it was, would send out a signal which, in six months, would reach Terra.
Bending, he brought out the key, turned the lock of the suitcase. All he had to do was open the suitcase,
feed an inch of punched data-tape into the orifice of the transmitter's encoder; the rest was automatic. He
switched the power on; every electronic item mimicked clothing, especially shoes; it appeared as if he
had come to Whale's Mouth to walk his life away, and elegantly at that.
"Why?" he asked Freya as he programmed, with a tiny scholarly construct, the inch of tape. "An army
for what?"
"I don't know, Mat. It's all Theodoric Ferry. I think Ferry is going to try to outspit the army on Terra that
Horst Bertold commands. In the short time I've been here I've talked to a few people, but—they're so
afraid. One man thought there'd been a non-humanoid sentient race found, and we're preparing to strike
for its colony-planets; maybe after a while and we've been here—"
Matson peered up and said, "I've encoded the tape to read,Garrison state. Sound out Bertold. It'll go
to our top pilot, Al Dosker, repeated over and over again, because at this distance the noise-factor—"
A laser beam removed the back of his head.
Freya shut her eyes.
A second beam from the laser rifle with the telescopic sight destroyed first one suitcase and then its



compa-nion. And then a shiny, spic-and-span young soldier walked up, leisurely, the rifle held loosely; he
glanced at her, up and down, carnally but with no particular pas-sion, then looked down at the dead
man, at Matson. "We caught your conversation on an aud rec." He pointed, and Freya saw, then, on the
overhang of the roof of the Telpor terminal building, a netlike inter-woven mesh. "That man"—the soldier
kicked—actually physically kicked with his toe—the corpse of Matson Glazer-Holliday—"said
something about 'our top pilot.' You're an organization, then. Friends of a United People? That it?"
She said nothing; she was unable to.
"Come along, honey," the soldier said to her. "For your psych-interrogation. We held it off because you
were kind enough—dumb enough—to inform us that your husband was following you. But we never—"
He died, because, by means of her "watch" she had released the low-velocity cephalotropic cyanide
dart; it moved slowly, but still he had not been able to evade it; he batted at it, childishly, with his hand,
not quite alarmed, not quite wise and frightened enough, and its tip penetrated a vein near his wrist. And
death came as swiftly and soundlessly as it had for Matson. The soldier swiveled and unwound and
unwound in his descent to the pavement, and Freya, then, turned and ran—
At a corner she went to the right, and, as she ran down a narrow, rubbish-heaped alley, reached into her
cloak, touched the aud transmitter which sent out an all-points, planet-wide alarm signal-alert; every Lies
In-corporated employee here at Whale's Mouth would be picking it up, if this was not already apparent
to him: if the alarm signal added anything to his knowledge, that which had probably come, crushingly,
within the first five minutes here on this side—this one-way side—of the Telpor apparatuses. Well,
anyhow she had done that; she had officially, through technical channels, alerted them, and that was all—
allshe could do.
She had no long-range inter-system transmitter as Matson had had; she could not send out a macrowave
signal which would be picked up by Al Dosker at the Sol system six months hence. In fact none of the
two thousand police agents of Lies Incorporated did. But they had weapons. She was, she realized with
dread and disbelief, automatically now in charge of those of the organization who survived; months ago
Matson had set her up legally so that on his death she assumed his chair, and this was not private: this
had been circulated, memo-wise, throughout the organization.
What could she tell the police agents who had gotten through—tell them, of course, that Matson was
dead, but what would be of use to them? What, she asked her-self,can we do?
Eighteen years, she thought; do we have to wait for theOmphalos, for Rachmael ben Applebaum to
arrive and see? Because by then it won't matter. For us, any-how; nor for this generation.
Two men ran toward her and one bleated, "Moon and cow," shrilly, his face contorted with fear.
"Jack Horner," she said numbly. "I don't know what to do," she said to them. "Matson is dead and his
big transmitter is destroyed. They were waiting for him; I led them right to him. I'm sorry." She could not
face the two field reps of the organization; she stared rigidly past them. "Even if we put our weapons into
use," she said, "they can take all of us out."
"But we can do some damage," one of the two police, middle-aged, with that fat sparetire at his mid-dle,
a tough old vet of the '92 war, said.
His companion, clasping a valise, said, "Yes, we can try, Miss Holm. Send out that signal; you have it?"



"No," she said, but she was lying and they knew it. "It's hopeless," she said. "Let's try to pass as
authentic emigrants. Let them draft us, put us into the barracks."
The seasoned, hard-eyed, paunchy one said, "Miss Holm, when they get into the luggage,they'll know. "
To his companion he said, "Bring it out."
Together, as she watched, the two experienced field reps of Lies Incorporated assembled a small
intricate weapon of a type she had never seen before; evidently it was from their advanced weapons
archives.
To her the younger man said quietly, "Send the signal. For a fight. As soon as our people come through;
keep the signal going so they'll pick it up as they emerge. We'll fight at this spot, not later, not when they
have us cut down into individuals, one here, one there."
She. Touched. The. Signal-tab.
And then she said, quietly, "I'll try to get a message-unit back to Terra via Telpor. Maybe in the
confu-sion—" Because there was going to be a lot of confu-sion as the Lies Incorporated men emerged
and immedi-ately picked up the fracas-in-progress signal. "—maybe it'll slip by."
"It won't," the hard-eyed old tomcat of a fighter said to her. He glanced at his companion. "But if we
focus on a transmission station maybe we can take and keep control long enough to run a vid track
through. Pass it back through the Telpor gate. Even if all two thous of us were to—" He turned to Freya.
"Can you direct the reps to make it to this point?"
"I have no more microwave patterns," she said, this time truthfully. "Just those two."
"Okay, Miss Holm." The vet considered. "Vid trans-missions through Telpor are accomplished over
there." He pointed and she saw an isolated multi-story struc-ture, windowless, with a guarded entrance;
in the gray sun of midday she caught a glint of metal, or armed sen-tries. "You have the code for back
home you can trans-mit?"
"Yes," she said. "One of fifty. Mat and I both had them; committed to memory. I could transmit it by aud
in ten seconds."
"I want," the wary, half-crouching veteran police-man said, "avid track of this." He swung his hand at the
landscape. "Something that can be spliced into the central coaxial cable and run on TV. Not just that we
know but that they know."They. The people back home—the innocents who lay beyond the one-way
gate; forever, she thought, because eighteen years is, really, forever.
"What's the code?" the younger field rep asked her.
Freya said, " 'Forgot to pack my Irish linen handker-chiefs. Please transmit via Telpor.' " She explained,
"We, Mat and I, worked out all logical possibilities. This comes the closest. Sparta."
"Yep," the older vet said. "The warrior state. The troublemaker. Well, it is close geographically to
Athens, although not quite close enough." To his companion he said. "Can we get in there and transmit
the aud signal?" He picked up the weapon which they had assembled.
"Sure," his younger companion said, nodding.



The older man clicked the weapon on.
Freya saw, then, into the grave and screamed; she ran and as she ran, struggled to get away, she knew it
for what it was: a refined form of nerve gas that—and then her coherent thoughts ceased and she simply
ran.
The armed sentry-soldiers guarding the windowless building ran, too.
And, unaffected, their metabolisms insulated by pre-injective antidotal hormones, the two field reps of
Lies Incorporated dogtrotted toward the windowless struc-ture, and, as they trotted, brought out small,
long-range laser pistols with telescopic sights.
That was her final view of them; at that point panic and flight swallowed her and it was only darkness.
And a darkness into which people of all sorts—she glimpsed, felt, them dimly—ran along side in
company with her; she was not alone: the future radiated.
Mat, she thought. You will not have your police state here at Whale's Mouth, and I warned you; I told
you. But, she thought, maybe nowthey won't either. If that encoded message can be put through.If.
And if, on the Terran side, there is someone smart enough to know what to do with it.

8

In his ship near the orbit of Pluto, Al Dosker received, routinely, the message transmitted from Freya
Holm at Whale's Mouth to the New New York office of Lies Incorporated.

FORGOT TO PACK MY IRISH LINEN HANDKER-CHIEFS.
PLEASE TRANSMIT VIA TELPOR. FREYA.

He walked to the rear of the ship, leisurely, because at this distance from the sun everything seemed
entropic, slowed down; it was as if, out here, there was a slower beat of the sidereal clock.
Opening the code box he ran his finger down the Fs. Then found the key. He then took the message and
fed it directly into the computer which held the spools that comprised the contents of the box.
Out came a paper ribbon with typed words. He read them.

MILITARY DICTATORSHIP. BARRACKS LIFE ON SPARTAN BASIS. PREPARATION FOR
WAR AGAINST UNKNOWN FOE.



Dosker stood for a moment, then, taking the original encoded message, as handled by Vidphone
Corpora-tion, ran it through the computer once again. And, once again, he read the message in clear and
once again it said what it had to say—could not be denied from saying. And there was no doubt,
because Matson Glazer-Holli-day himself had programmed the computer-box.
This, Dosker thought. Out of fifty possibilities rang-ing from the Elysium field to—hell.
Roughly, this lay halfway on the hell side. By a gross count often. It ranked about as bad as he had
expected.
So, he thought, now we know.
We know . . .and we can't validate it.
The scrap of ribbon, the encoded message, was, in-credible as it seemed, completely, utterly worthless.
Because, he asked himself,whom do we take it to?
Their own organization, Lies Incorporated had been truncated by Mat's action, by the sending of their
best men to Whale's Mouth; all which remained was the staff of bureaucrats in New New York—and
himself.
And, of course, Rachmael ben Applebaum out in 'tween space in theOmphalos. Busily learning Attic
Greek.
Now, from the New New York office, a second mes-sage, encoded, arrived; this, too, he fed to the
com-puter, more quickly, this time. It came out drearily and he read it with futile shame—shame because
he had tried and failed to stop what Matson planned; he felt the moral weight on himself.

WE CANNOT HOLD OUT. VIVISECTION IN PROGRESS.

Can I help you? he wondered, suffering in his im-potent rage. Goddam you, Matson, he thought, you
had to do it; you were greedy. And you took two thousand men and Freya Holm with you, to be
slaughtered over there where we can't do anything because "we" consist of nothing.
However, he could perform one final act—his effort, not connected with the effort to save the multitude
of Terran citizens who, within the following days, weeks, would be filing through Telpor gates to Whale's
Mouth, but to save someone who deserved a reprieve from a self-imposed burden: a burden which these
two encoded messages via Telpor and the Vidphone Corp had ren-dered obsolete.
Taking the risk that a UN monitor might pick up his signal, Al Dosker sent out an u.h.f. beamed radio
signal to theOmphalos and Rachmael ben Applebaum.
When he raised theOmphalos, now at hyper-see velocity and beyond the Sol system, Dosker asked
brut-ally, "How's the odes of Pindar coming?"



"Just simple fables so far," Rachmael's voice came, distantly, mixed with the background of static, of
inter-system interference as the signal-gathering cone aboard Dosker's ship rotated, tried to gather the
weak, far-distant impulse. "But you weren't supposed to contact me," Rachmael said, "unless—"
"Unless," Dosker said, "this happened. We have, at Lies Incorporated, an encoding method that can't be
broken. Because the data are not in what's transmitted. Listen carefully, Rachmael." And, amplified by his
ship's transmitter, his words—he hoped—were reaching theOmphalos; a segment of his equipment
recorded his words and broadcast them several times: a multiplica-tion of the signal to counter, on a
statistical basis, the high background; by utilizing the principle of repetition he expected to get his message
through to Rachmael. "You know the joke about the prison inmate," Dosker said, "who stands up and
yells, 'Three.' And everyone laughs."
"Yes," Rachmael said alertly. "Because 'three' refers to an entire multi-part joke. Which all the inmates
know; they've been confined together so long."
"By that method," Dosker said, "out[our] transmission from Whale's Mouth operated today. We have a
binary computer as the decoder. Originally, we started out by flipping a coin for each letter of the
alphabet. Tails made it zero or gate-shut; heads means one or gate-open. It's either zero or one; that's the
binary com-puter's modus operandi. Then we invented fifty mes-sage-units which describe possible
conditions on the other side; the messages were constructed in such a way that each consisted of a
unique sequence of ones and zeros. I—" His voice came out ragged, hoarse. "I have just now received a
message, which when reduced to the elements of the binary system consists of a sequence reading:
11101001100111010110000010011010100111 0000100111110100000111. There is nothing
intrinsic in this binary sequence that can be decoded, because it simply acts as one of the fifty unique
signals known to our box—here on my ship—and it trips one particular tape. But its length—it gives a
spurious impression to cryptographers of anintrinsic message."
"And your tape—" Rachmael said, "that was tripped—"
"I'll paraphrase," Dosker said. "The operational word is—Sparta." He was silent then.
"A garrison state?" Rachmael's voice came.
"Yes."
"Against whom?"
"They didn't say. A second message came, but it added relatively little. Except that it came through in
clear and it told us that they can't hold out. They're be-ing decimated by the military, over there."
"And you're sure this is authentic data?" Rachmael asked.
"Only Freya Holm, Matson and I," Dosker said, "have the decode boxes into which the messages can
be fed as a binary tripping-sequence. It came from Freya, evidently; anyhow she signed the first." He
added, "They didn't even try to sign the second one."
"Well," Rachmael said, "then I will turn back. There's no point to my trip, now."
"That's up to you to decide." He waited, wondering what Rachmael ben Applebaum's decision would
be; but, he thought, as you say, it really doesn't matter, because the real tragedy is twenty-four light-years



away, and not the destruct, the taking-out, of Lies Incorporated's two thousand best people, but—the
forty million who've gone before. And the eighty million or more who will follow, since, though we have
this knowledge onthis side of the teleport gates, there's no means by which we can communicate it over
the mass info media to the population—
He was thinking that when the UN pursuit ships, three of them like black sliding fish, closed noiselessly in
on him, reached a.-to-a. missile range; their missiles fired, and Dosker's Lies Incorporated ship was cut
into fragments.
Stunned, passive, he floated in his self-contained suit with its own air, heat, water, transmitter,
waste-disposal deposit box, squeeze-tubes of food . . . he drifted on and on, seemingly for eternity,
thinking about vague and even happy things, about a planet of green forests and of women and the
tinkling noise of get-togethers, and yet knowing dully that he could live only a short time like this, and
wondering, too, if the UN had gotten theOmphalos as they had gotten him; obviously their vigilant
switchboard of monitors had picked up his radio carrier-wave, but whether they had picked up
Rachmael's too, which operated on another band . . . god, he thought, I hope not; I hope it's just me.
He was still hoping when the UN pursuit ship moved up beside him, sent out a robot-like construct
which fished at him until it had with great care grappled him without puncturing his suit. Amazed, he
thought, Why don't they just dig a little hole in the suit-fabric, let out the air and heat, let me float here and
meanwhile die?
It bewildered him. And now a hatch of the UN pur-suit ship was opening; he was reeled in, like an
en-meshed quarry; the hatch slammed shut and he felt the artificial gravity which prevailed within the
expensive, ultra-modern vessel; he lay prone and then, wearily, got to his feet, stood.
Facing him, a uniformed UN senior officer, armed, said, "Take off your suit. Your emergency suit.
Under-stand?" He spoke with a heavy accent; Dosker saw, by his armband, that he was from the Nordic
League.
Piece by piece, Dosker shed his emergency suit.
"You Goths," Dosker said, "seem to be running things." At the UN, anyhow. He wondered about
Whale's Mouth.
The UN officer, still pointing the laser pistol at him, said, "Sit down. We are returning to Terra.Nach
Terra;versteh'n?" Behind him a second UN employee, not armed, sat at the control console; the ship
was on a high-velocity course directed toward the third planet and Dosker guessed that only an hour's
travel lay ahead. "The Secretary General," the UN officer said, "has asked to speak to you personally.
Meanwhile, compose yourself and wait. Would you like a magazine to read? We haveUN Back-peop
Assist. Or an entertain-spool to watch?"
"No," Dosker said, and sat staring straight ahead, blindly.
The UN officer said, "We tracked theOmphalos by her carrier-wave transmission, also. As we did your
ship."
"Good bit," Dosker said sardonically.
"However, due to the distance involved, it will take several days to reach her."



Dosker said, "But you will, though."
"That is a certainty," the UN officer said, with his heavy Swedish accent, nodding. He had no doubts.
Nor did Dosker.
The only issue was the time-factor. As the officer said, some few days; no more.
He stared ahead, sat, waited, as the high-velocity UN pursuit ship hurried toward Terra, New New
York and Horst Bertold.

At the UN Headquarters in New New York he was given a thorough physical examination; the doctors
and nurses attached one testing apparatus after another, checked their readings, located no grafted-in
subdermal devices.
"You survived your ordeal amazingly well," the doc-tor in charge informed him, at last, as he was given
hisclothing and allowed once more to dress.
"And now what?" Dosker asked.
"The Secretary General is ready to see you," the doc-tor said briefly, marking his chart; he nodded his
head to ward a door.
Having dressed, Dosker walked step by step to the door, opened it.
"Please hurry it up," Horst Bertold said.
Shutting the door after him Dosker said, "Why?"
Seated at his large antique oak desk, the UN Secretary General glanced up; he was a heavy man,
red-haired, with a pinched, elongated nose and almost colorless small lips. His features were small but his
shoulders, his arms and his ribcage, bulged, as if from countless steam baths and from handball; his legs,
his feet, showed the tonus of great childhood walking trips and miles of bike riding: this was an outdoor
man, confined by his job to a desk, but longing for open spaces which did not now exist. A thoroughly
healthy man, physically-speaking, Dosker thought. Strange, he thought, and, in spite of himself, received
a good impression.
"We picked up your radio communication with theOmphalos," Bertold said, his English perfect—in fact
overly perfect; it had a tape-like quality, and probably it had been so learned. The impression here was
not so good. "Thereby as you know we located both ships. We also understand that you are now the
ranking executive of Lies Incorporated, Miss Holm and Mr. Glazer-Hol-liday having crossed via
Telpor—under cover names, of course—to Whale's Mouth."
Dosker shrugged, said nothing, imparted no free in-formation; waited.
"However—" Horst Bertold tapped his pen against the top document on his desk, frowned. "This is a
transcript, verbatim, of the interchange between you and the fanatic, Rachmael ben Applebaum. You
in-itiated the radio exchange;you raised theOmphalos. "Bertold glanced up and his blue, light eyes were
sharp. "We have put our cryptographers on the sequence in code which you transmitted . . . the same
which you previously received from the Vidphone Corp. Intrin-sically it means nothing. But in the



wreckage of your ship we located your decoding computer, the intact box with its fifty tapes. We
therefore matched the transmis-sion and recorded binary sequence to the proper tape. And it was as you
informed ben Applebaum."
"Did that surprise you?"
"Of course not," Bertold said swiftly. "Why should you deceive your own client? And at the risk—a risk
which should not have been taken, as it so turned out—of revealing the location of your own vessel?
Any-how—" Bertold's voice sank to an introspective mur-mur. "We still were not satisfied. We therefore
checked over our monitoring—"
"They're being wiped out, over there," Dosker said. "The two thousand field reps and Mat and Freya."
His voice was toneless; he told this because he knew they would get it by a 'wash anyhow—they could
get any-thing that was there, any memory, any motives, plans, projects; after all, his own organization, far
smaller than the UN, could do so—had done so, over many years, and to many persons, by means of
psychiatrists and their techniques.
Bertold said, "Trails of Hoffman Limited and Theo-doric Ferry entirely control Newcolonizedland. The
UN has no staff at Whale's Mouth. All we know is what we have received, as a courtesy, in aud and vid
form. The info signals through the Telpors, over these years of col-onization; our original monitoring
satellites have been inoperative ever since THL auspical jurisdiction began."
There was silence and then Dosker said incredulously, "Then this is as much news to you as it is to—"
"We believed the fifteen years of aud and vid tapes; we saw no reason to check for ourselves. THL had
vol-unteered to underwrite the colonization economically; they picked up the tab and we gave them the
franchisebecause they owned the Telpor patent and equipment. Dr. von Einem's patents are
possessed exclusively by THL; he had the legal right to so arrange that. And this—" Bertold picked up
the top document from his desk, showed it to Dosker; it was a typed transcript, in its entirety, of his own
conversation by radio with Rachmael. "This," Horst Bertold said, "is the result."
Dosker said, "Tell me what it means." Because, he thought, I don't know. I saw the original messages
when they arrived; I understand the literal meaning of the words. But that's all.
The UN Secretary General said "Out of the forty million colonists Ferry has conscripted an army and
provided it with modern, sophisticated weapons. There is no 'non-humanoid race,' no non-Terran culture
to encounter. Had there been our unmanned monitors would have detected them; by now we've touched
every star system in our galaxy." He stared at Dosker. "It's us," he said. "The UN. That's what Theodoric
Ferry is proposing to engage. When enough colonists have gone across. Then the up-to-then 'one-way'
aspect of the teleportation equipment will suddenly reveal that the so-called Theorem One was false."
"Here?" Dosker said, then. "They'll re-enter through their own Telpor outlets?"
"And take us on," Bertold said. "But not now. At this point they're not quite large enough." To himself he
said, "At least so we estimate; we studied samples of groups who had emigrated; he can't have more than
one million men actually under arms. But weapons—they may have u.s.h.: ultra sophisticated hardware;
after all, they've got von Einem working for them."
Dosker said, "Where is von Einem? At Whale's Mouth?"
"We put a tail on him instantly." Bertold's fingers convulsed, crushed the document. "And proved



already—ganz genug!—that we were correct. Von Einem has been all these years passing back and
forth between Terra and Whale's Mouth; he has always used—they have always—operated the Telpor
instruments for two-way travel—so it's verified,Dosker. Verified!" He stared at Dosker.

9

When Rachmael ben Applebaum made out the dim, shadowy shapes of the UN pursuit ships as they
ap-proached to escort theOmphalos he knew that, whatever else was a cover, at least this much was
true: the UN had traced him, had him and no doubt Dosker as well. So—he clicked on the microwave
transmitter and raised, after an interval, the UN pursuit ships' local commanding officer.
"I'll believe you," Rachmael said, "when I hear Al Dosker say it." And when I look him over, he said to
himself, for signs of a cephalic 'wash. But—why would they say it if it wasn't true? They had him; he and
theOmphalos, detected, were now booty captured by the armed inter-system vessels of the great UN
structure that spanned from planet to planet. Why make up a cover when there was no force to influence,
no force able to provide any resistance?
God above, he thought. If it's true, then we can rely on Horst Bertold. We let our prejudices blind us . . .
von Einem is German and Horst Bertold is German. But that does not any more prove they are working
together, are secret collaborators, than, say, any two Ubangis or any two Jews. Adolf Hitler was not
even a German . . . so our own thinking, he realized, has betrayed us.
But—maybe now we can believe this. We can see. New Whole Germany has produced Dr. Sepp von
Einem and Trails of Hoffman Limited . . . but it may also have produced something else when it created
Horst Bertold.
We will see, Rachmael said to himself.
—Will wait until we are in New New York at UN Headquarters; face Horst Bertold and see the
evidence of the assertion given by relayed macroradio signal.
The assertion that as of six a.m. New New York time this morning, UN troops had entered all retail
outlets of Trails of Hoffman Limited, had seized the Telpor instruments—had, throughout Terra,
arbitrarily and without warning of any kind, halted emigration to Whale's Mouth.
Twelve hours later Rachmael was led by a worried, overworked female secretary into the UN Secretary
General's office.
"The fanatic," Horst Bertold said, surveying him. "The idealist who sparked the hankering in Matson
Glazer-Holliday that caused him to attempt hiscoup d'etat at Whale's Mouth." He turned to an aide.
"Bring in the TelporApparat. "
Seconds later the familiar bipolar mechanism was noisily carted into the UN leader's office, along with a
thoroughly unnerved-looking technician; minus his goggles he looked frightened and—small.
To the Telpor technician, Horst Bertold said, "Does this operate to permit teleportation two ways? Or
only one?Zwei oder ein ? Antworte."



"Just outward, Mein Herr Sekretar General," the technician quavered. "As Theorem One demonstrates,
the recession of matter toward—"
Horst Bertold said to his aide, "Bring in our 'wash psychiatrists. Have them start with their EEG
mach-ines."
At that, the Telpor technician said, in a voice that broke with dismayed intimidation,"Dasz brauchen Sie
nicht."
"He's saying," Bertold said to Rachmael, "that he will cooperate; we don't need to employ our
psychiatrists with him. So ask him." He jerked his head fiercely toward the cowering THL employee, this
man in his white smock who had assisted in the emigration of literally millions of innocent human beings.
"Ask him whether the Telpors work both ways."
The technician said, virtually inaudibly,"Beide. Both ways."
"There never was any 'Theorem One,' " Bertold snapped.
"Sie haben Recht," the technician agreed, nodding.
"Bring in Dosker," Bertold said to his overworked female secretary.
When Dosker appeared he said to Rachmael at once, "Freya is still alive over there." He indicated the
Telpor instrument. "We've been in contact through this. But—"He hesitated.
Horst Bertold said, "Matson Glazer-Holliday is dead. They murdered him immediately. But nearly half of
Lies Incorporated's field personnel remain alive at various installations at Newcolonizedland, and we're
beginning to supply them on a strategic basis. With wea-pons of types which they instantly need. And
presently we will, at tactical spots, try commando teams; we can do a lot, I think, with our commando
teams."
"What can I do?" Rachmael said. He felt over-whelming impotence; it was going on—had been going
on—without him. While he journeyed—pointlessly—through 'tween, utterly empty, space.
This, the UN Secretary General seemed to read on his face. "You awakened Matson," he pointed out.
"Which caused Matson to attempt his aborted coup. And the relayed message from Freya Holm to
Dosker and then to theOmphalos informed us of the reality hidden under Theodoric Ferry's cover; a
cover which we carry the moral stigma for accepting all these fifteen years. Everything based on the one
fundamental hoax that teleportation could be achieved in only one direc-tion . . ." He grimaced.
"However, Trails of Hoffman Limited made an error as great as their cover when they did not impede
your two thousand Lies Incorporated veterans from crossing over." To Dosker he said,"Buteven so, that
would not have been enough. However, with our tactical support—"
"It wasn't enough even at the start," Dosker said, "since they took out Matson right away." Half to
him-self, half to Rachmael, he said, "We never had a chance. Probably Matson never knew; he probably
didn't even live that long. Anyhow, maybe you can retrieve Freya. Do you want to?"
Instantly Rachmael said, "Yes." To Horst Bertold he said, "Can I get equipment out of you? Defensive
screens, if not offensive hardware? And I'll go alone." They would not, in the confusion, notice him,
perhaps. Whale's Mouth had become a battlefield, and too many participants were involved; one lone



man was a cypher, a mote; he would enter inconspicuously and if he found her at all it would be that way,
as an entity too trifling to be considered by the vast warring entities. Within the context of the power
struggle which had already trun-cated Lies Incorporated; one contender had been abol-ished at the start,
and now only the two monoliths existed in the field to slug it out, THL on one hand, the UN as its wise
old antagonist, its roots of victory deep in the last century. The UN, he reflected, had a headstart, that of
fifty years.
But Trails of Hoffman Limited had the inventive genius of half-senile but still crafty old Dr. Sepp von
Einem. And—the inventor of the Telpor instrument might not have ceased with that construct.
He wondered if Horst Bertold had considered this.
It didn't matter, because if von Einem had produced something else of equal—or of merely
significant—value,it would show up now.
In the streets of Newcolonizedland, whatever Dr. Sepp von Einem and THL had over the years
developed would be at this moment in full use. Because this was, for all participants, the Dies Irae, the
Day of Wrath; now they were, like beasts in the field, being tried. And God help, Rachmael thought, the
contender who was found wanting. Because out of this only one participant would live; there would be
extended to the loser no par-tial, no half, life. Not inthis arena.
He himself—he had only one task, as he saw it. That of getting Freya Holm out of Whale's Mouth and
back safely to Terra.
The eighteen-year journey, the odyssey aboard theOmphalos, learning Attic Greek so that he could
read theBachae in the original—that childlike fantasy had withered at the press of the iron glove of the
reality-situation, the struggle going on—not eighteen years from now—but at this instant, at the Whale's
Mouth terminals of six thousand Telpor stations.
"'Sein Herz voll Hasz geladen,' " Horst Bertold said to Rachmael. "You speak Yiddish? You
understand?"
"I speak a little Yiddish," Rachmael said, "but that's German. 'His heart heavy with hate.' What's that
from?"
"From the Civil War in Spain," Bertold said. "From a song of the International Brigade. Germans,
mostly, who had left the Third Reich to fight in Spain against Franco, in the 1930s. They were, I suppose,
Com-munists. But—they were fighting Fascism, and very early;and they were Germans. So they were
always 'good' Germans . . . what that man, Hans Beimler, hated was Nazism and Fascism, in all its stages
and states and manifestations." After a pause he said, "We fought the Nazis, too, we 'good' Germans;
verges' uns nie. " Forget us never, Bertold had said, quietly, calmly. Because we did not merely join the
fight late, in the 1950s or '60s, but from the start. The first human beings to fight to the death, to kill and
be killed by the Nazis, were—
Germans.
"And Terra," Bertold said to Rachmael, "ought not to forget that. As I hope they will not forget who at
this moment is taking out Dr. Sepp von Einem and creatures allied with him. Theodoric Ferry, his boss . .
. who, by the way, is an American." He smiled at Rachmael. "But there are 'good' Americans. Despite
the A-bomb dropped on those Japanese women and children and elderly."



Rachmael was silent; he could not answer this.
"All right," Bertold said, then. "We will put you together with a wep-x, a weapon expert. To see what
gear you should have. And then good luck. I hope you bring back Miss Holm." He smiled—fleetingly.
And turned at once to other matters.
A minor UN official plucked at Rachmael's sleeve. "I'm to take charge of your problem," he explained.
"I will be handling it from now on. Tell me, Mr. ben Applebaum; precisely what contemporary—and I do
not mean last month's or last year's—weapons of war you are accustomed to operating, if any? And how
recently you have been exposed to the neurological and bacterial—"
"I've had absolutely no military training," Rachmael said. "Or antineuro or -bac modulation."
"We can still assist you," the minor UN official said. "There is certain equipment requiring no prior
ex-perience. However—" He made a mark on the sheet at-tached to his clipboard. "This does make a
difference; eighty percent of the hardware available would be useless to you." He smiled encouragingly.
"We must not let it get us down, Mr. ben Applebaum."
"I won't," Rachmael said grimly. "So I'll be teleported to Whale's Mouth after all."
"Yes, within a matter of an hour."
"The unteleported man," Rachmael murmured. "Will be teleported." Instead of enduring the eighteen
years aboard theOmphalos. Ironic.
"Are you capable morally," the UN official inquired, "of employing a nerve gas, or would you prefer
to—"
"Anything," Rachmael said, "that'll bring back Freya. Anything except the phosphorus weapons, the
jellied petroleum products; I won't use any of those, and also the bone-marrow destroyers—leave those
out. But lead slugs, the old-fashioned muzzle-expelled shells; I'll accept them, as well as the laser-beam
artifacts." He wondered what variety of weapon had gotten Matson Glazer-Holliday, the most
professional of men in this area.
"We have something new," the UN official said, con-sulting his clipboard, "and according to the Defense
Department people very promising. It's a time-warping construct that sets up a field which coagulates
the—"
"Just equip me," Rachmael said. "And get me over there. To her."
"Right away," the UN official promised, and led him rapidly down a side hall to a hi-speed descent
ramp. To the UN Advance-weapons Archives.

At the retail outlet of Trails of Hoffman Limited, Jack and Ruth McElhatten and their two children
emerged from a flapple taxi; a robot-like organism carted their luggage, all seven overstuffed
seedy—borrowed for the most part—suitcases, as they entered the modern, small building which for
them was to be the last stopping-point on Terra.
Going up to the counter, Jack McElhatten searched about for a clerk to wait on them. Jeez, he thought;



just when you decide to make the Big Movethey decide to step out for a coffee break.
A smartly uniformed armed UN soldier, with an arm-band identifying him as a member of the crack
UAR division, approached him. "What did you wish?"
Jack McElhatten said, "Hell, we came here to emi-grate. I've got the poscreds." He reached for his
wallet. "Where are the forms to fill out, and then I know we got to take shots and—"
The UN soldier politely said, "Sir, have you watched your info media during the last forty-eight hours?"
"We've been packing." Ruth McElhatten spoke up. "Why, what is it? Has something happened?"
And then, through an open rear door, Jack McElhat-ten sawit . The Telpor. And his heart bent with
mingled dread and anticipation. What an admirably large move this was, this true migration; seeing the
twin wall-like polar surfaces of the Telpor was to see—the frontier it-self. In his mind he recalled the
years of TV scenes of grasslands, of miles of green, lush—
"Sir," the UN soldier said, "read this notice." He pointed to a square white with words so dark, so
un-glamorous, that Jack McElhatten, even without reading them, felt the glow, the wonder of what for
him was a long-held inner vision, depart.
"Oh good lord," Ruth said, from beside him as she read the notice. "The UN—it's closed down all the
Telpor agencies. Emigration has been suspended." She glanced in dismay at her husband. "Jack, it's now
illegal for us to emigrate, it says."
The UN soldier said, "Later on, madam. Emigration will resume. When the situation is resolved." He
turned away, then, to halt a second couple, who, with four children, had entered the Trails of Hoffman
office.
Through the still-open rear door, McElhatten saw, to his dumb disbelief, four work-garbed laborers;
they were busily, sweatily, efficiently torch-cutting into sec-tions the Telpor equipment.
He then forced himself to read the notice.
After he had read it the UN soldier tapped him—not unkindly—on the shoulder, pointed out a nearby
TV set, which, turned on, was being watched by the second couple and their four children. "These are
Newcolon-izedland," the UN soldier said. "You see?" His English was not too good, but he was
attempting to explain; he wanted the McElhattens to understandwhy.
Approaching the TV set, Jack McElhatten saw gray, barracks-like structures with tiny, slotted windows
like raptor eyes. And—high fences. He stared, uncompre-hendingly . . . and yet, underneath,
comprehending completely; he did not even have to listen to the aud track, to the UN announcer.
Ruth whispered, "My god. It's a—concentration camp."
A puff of smoke and the top floors of the gray cement building disappeared; dwarfed dark shapes
scampered, and rapid-fire weapons clattered in the background of the announcer's British-type voice; the
calm, reasonable commentary explained what did not need to be ex-plained.
At least not after this sight.



"Is that," Ruth said to her husband, "how we would have lived over there?"
Presently he said, to her and their two children, "Come on. Let's go home." He signaled the
robot-organism to pick their luggage up once more.
"But," Ruth protested, "couldn't the UN have helped us? They have all those welfare agencies—"
Jack McElhatten said, "The UN is protecting us now. And not with welfare agencies." He indicated the
work-garbed laborers busy dismantling the Telpor unit. "But so late—"
"Not," he said, "too late." He signaled the robot-thing to carry their seven bulging suitcases back outside
onto the sidewalk; avoiding the many passing people, the dense, always dense, sidewalk traffic, he
searched for a flapple taxi to take himself and his family home again to their miserably cramped, hated
conapt.
A man, distributing leaflets, approached him, held out a broadsheet; McElhatten reflexively accepted it.
The Friends of a United People outfit, he saw. Glaring banner:

UN VERIFIES COLONY TYRANNY

He said, aloud, "They were right. The cranks. The lunatics, like that guy who wanted to make the
eighteen-year trip by interstellar ship." He carefully folded the broadsheet, put it into his pocket to read
later; right now he felt too numbed. "I hope," he said aloud, "that my boss will take me back."
"They'refighting,"Ruth said. "You could see on the TV screen; they showed UN soldiers and then
others in funny uniforms I never saw before in all my—"
"You think," Jack McElhatten asked his wife, "you could sit in the taxi with the kids while I find a bar
and get one good stiff drink?"
She said, "Yes. I could." Now a flapple taxi was swooping down, attracted; it headed for the curb, and
the four of them and their mound of fat luggage en-ticing its tropism.
"Because," Jack McElhatten said, "I can use for in-stance a bourbon and water. A double." And then,
he said to himself, I'm heading for UN recruiting head-quarters and volunteer.
He did not know for what—not yet. But they would tell him.
His help was needed; he felt it in his blood. A war had to be won, and then, years from now but not
eighteen as it had been for that nut written up in the 'papes, they could do it, could emigrate. But before
that—the fighting. The winning of Whale's Mouth all over again. Actually, for the first time.
But even before that: the two drinks.

Acrid smoke billowed about him, stinging his nos-trils; he halted, bent in a reflexive half-crouch. Then,



here now on the far side, on the ninth planet of Fomal-haut, Rachmael ben Applebaum fingered
relentlessly the meager flat tin, the container in his trousers pocket: this the wep-x at the
Advance-weapons Archives had at last provided him—radically disguised as well as radi-cally beyond
anything in the standard arsenals of the UN. The camouflage of the hyper-miniaturized time-warping
construct had seemed to him, when he first viewed it, the sine qua non of misleading packages: the
weapon appeared to be bootlegged tin of prophoz from Yucatán, fully automated, helium-battery
powered, guaranteed for five-year operation and gynetropic.
Briefly, he huddled in the safe shadow of a wall, the weapon out, now, visible in the palm of his hand;
even the gaily painted halfwitted slogan of the Central American factory had been duplicated, and, at a
time like this, on a stranger-planet in another system, he read the quixotic words familiar to him since
adolescence:

MORE FUN
AFTER DONE!

And with this, he thought, I'm going to get Freya back. In its witless, gaily colored way the
camouflage-package of the weapon seemed more of an insult, a quasi-obscene commentary on the
situation confronting him. However, he returned it to his pocket; sliding up-ward to an erect position he
once again viewed the nebu-lous rolls of particles in suspension, the cloud masses derived from the
molecularization of the nearby build-ings. He saw, too, dim human shapes that sped at ludicrously
accelerated speed, each in its own direction, as if some central control usually in operation had, at this
dangerous time, where so much was at stake, clicked off, leaving each of the sprinting figures on its own.
And yet they all seemed to understand what they were doing; their activities were not undirected, not
random. To his right a cluster had gathered to assemble a com-plex weapon; with industrious, ant-busy
fingers they snapped one component after another into position in expert progression: they knew their
business, and he wondered—he could not, in the erratic light, make out their uniforms—which faction
they represented. Prob-ably, he decided, better to conclude they belonged to THL; safer, he realized.
And he would have to assume this, until otherwise proved, about each and every per-son whom he
encountered here on this side, this New-colonizedland which was no—
Directly before him a soldier appeared whose eyes glowed huge and unwinking, owl eyes which fixed on
him and would never, now that they had perceived him, again look away.
Diving to the ground, Rachmael fumbled numbly for the prophoz tin; it had happened too soon, too
un-expectedly—he was not ready and the weapon which he had brought here to use for Freya was not
even posi-tioned to protect him, let alone her. His hand touched it, buried deep within his pocket . . . and
at that moment a muffledpop burst near his face as, above him, the THL soldier twisted to re-aim and fire
once more.
A high-velocity dart waggled its directing fins as it spun at him. It was, he realized as he watched it
descend toward him, a LSD-tipped dart; the hallucinogenic ergotic alkaloid derivative constituted—had
constituted ever since its introduction into the field of weapons of war—a unique instrument for reducing
the enemy to a condition in which he was absolutely neutralized: in-stead of destroying him, the LSD,
injected intraven-ously by the dart, destroyed hisworld.



Sharp, quick pain snuffed at his arm; the dart had plunged into him, had embedded itself successfully.
The LSD had entered his circulatory system. He had, now, only a few minutes ahead; that realization
alone generally took the target out: to know, under conditions such as these, that very shortly the entire
self-system, the structure of world-character which had developed stage by stage over the years from
birth on—
His thoughts ceased. The LSD had reached the cor-tical tissue of his frontal lobe and all abstract
menta-tional processes had instantly shut down. He still saw the world, saw the THL soldier leisurely
reloading the dart-releasing gun, the rolling clouds of A-warhead-contaminated ash, the half-ruined
buildings, the ant-like scampering figures here and there. He could recognize them and understand what
each was. But beyond that—nothing.
Color, Rachmael thought as he saw the transforma-tion in the THL soldier's face; the
color-transforma-tion—it had already set in. Swiftly, the drug moved him to ruin; in his bloodstream it
rushed him toward the end of his existence in the shared world. For me, he knew, this—but he could not
even think it, carry out the steps of a logical thought. Awareness was there, knowledge of what was
happening. He watched the lips of the THL soldier become bright, phosphorescent, shiny-pink pure
luminosity; the lips, forming a perfect bow, then floated off, detached themselves from the soldier's face,
leaving behind the ordinary colorless lips: one hemisphere of Rachmael's brain had received the LSD and
succumbed, undoubtedly the right, he being righthanded, the hemis-phere on that side therefore being the
undifferentiated of the two. The left still held out, still saw the mundane world; even now, deprived of
abstract reasoning, no longer capable of adult cerebral processes, the higher centers of the left
hemisphere of his brain fought to stabilize the picture of the world as it knew it, fought knowing that within
seconds, now, that picture would give way, would collapse and let in, like some endless flood, the
entirety of raw percept-data, uncontrolled, unstructured, without meaning or order, each datum unrelated
to the others: the portion of his brain which imposed the framework of space and time onto incom-ing
data would not be able to carry out its task. And, with the ringing in of that instant, he would plunge back
decades. Back to the initial interval after birth—entry into a world utterly unfamiliar, utterly
incompre-hensible.
He had lived through that once. Each human, at the moment of birth, had. But now. Now he possessed
memory, retention of the disappearing usual world. That and language; that and realization of what
ordi-nary and expected experience would presently become.
And how long, subjectively, it would last. How long it would be before he regained—if he did
regain—his customary world once more.
The THL soldier, his weapon reloaded, started away, already searching for the next target; he did not
bother to notice Rachmael, now. He, too, knew what lay ahead. Rachmael could be forgotten; even now
he no longer lived in the shared world, no longer existed.
Without thought, prompted by a brain-area silent but still functioning, Rachmael raced after the THL
soldier; with no lapse of time, without sense of having crossed intervening space, he clutched the soldier,
dragged him aside and took possession of the long-bladed throwing knife holstered at the man's waist.
Choking him with his left arm Rachmael yanked the blade backward in an arc that reversed itself: the
blade returned, and the THL soldier followed its reverse trajectory as it approached his stomach. He
struggled; in Rachmael's grip he strained, and his eyes dulled as if baked, dried out, with-out fluid and
old, mummified by a thousand years. And, in Rachmael's hand, the knife became something he did not
know.



The thing which he held ceased its horizontal motion. It moved, but in another direction which was
neither up nor forward; he had never seen this direction and its weirdness appalled him, because the thing
in his hand moved without moving: it progressed and yet stayed where it was, so that he did not have to
change the direc-tion of his eye focus. His gaze fixed, he watched the shining, brittle, transparent thing
elaborate itself, pro-duce from its central column slender branches like glass stalagmites; in a series of
lurches, of jumps forward into the non-spacial dimension of altered movement, the tree-thing developed
until its complexity terrified him. It was all over the world, now; from his hand it had jerked out into stage
after stage so that, he knew, it was every-where, and nothing else had room to exist: the tree-thing had
taken up all space and crowded reality-as-it-usually-was out.
And still it grew.
He decided, then, to look away from it. In his mind he recalled in distinctness, with labored, painstaking
concentration, the THL soldier; he noted the direction, in relation to the enormous, world-filling
tree-thing, along which the soldier could be found. He made his head turn, his eyes focus that way.
A small circle, like some far end of a declining tube, opened up and unveiled for him a minute portion of
reality-as-it-usually-was. Within that circle he made out the face of the THL soldier, unchanged; it
stabilized in normal luminosity and shape. And, meanwhile, throughout the endless area which was not the
distant circle of world, a multitude of noiseless, sparklike con-figurations flicked on and achieved form
with such magnitude of brightness that even without focussing on them he experienced pain; they appalled
the optic por-tion of his percept-system, and yet did not halt the transfer of their impressions: despite the
unendurable brilliance the configurations continued to flow into him, and he knew that they had come to
stay. Never, he knew. They wouldnever leave.
For an almost unmeasurable fraction of an instant he ventured to look directly at one unusually
compelling light-configuration; its furious activity attracted his gaze.
Below it, the circle which contained unaltered reality changed. At once he forced his attention back. Too
late?
The THL soldier's face. Swollen eyes. Pale. The man returned Rachmael's gaze; their eyes met and each
per-ceived the other, and then the physiognomic properties of the reality-landscape swiftly underwent a
crumbling new alteration; the eyes became rocks that immediately were engulfed by a freezing wind
which obliterated them with dense snow. The jaw, the cheeks and mouth and chin, even the nose
disappeared as they became lesser mountains of barren, uninhabited rock that also suc-cumbed to the
snow. Only the tip of the nose projected, a peak presiding alone above a ten-thousand-mile waste that
supported no life nor anything that moved. Rach-mael watched, and years lapsed by, recorded by the
in-ternal clock of his perceiving mind; he knew the dura-tion and knew the meaning of the landscape's
perpetual refusal to live: he knew where he was and he recognized this which he saw. It was beyond his
abilitynot to recognize it.
This was the hellscape.
No, he thought. It has to stop. Because now he saw tiny distant figures sprouting everywhere to
populate the hellscape, and as they formed they continued the dancing, frenzied activities familiar to
them—and fa-miliar to him, as if he were back once more and again witnessing this, and knowing with
certitude what he would, within the next thousand years, be forced to scrutinize.
His fear, concentrated and directed in this one field, superimposed like a dissolving beam over the



hellscape, rolled back the snow, made its thousand-year-old depth fade into thinness; the rocks once
more appeared and then retreated backward into time to resume their func-tion as features of a face. The
hellscape reverted with awful obedience to what it had been, as if almost no force were needed to push it
out of existence, away from the stronghold of reality in which it had a moment before entrenched itself.
And this appalled him the most of all: this told him dreadful news. The merest presence of life, even the
smallest possible quantity of volition, desire and intent was enough to reverse the process by which the
eternal landscape of hell made itself known. And this meant that not long ago, when the hellscape first
formed, he had been withoutany life, any at all. Not an enormous force from outside breaking in—that
was not what confronted him. There was no adversary. These, the terrible transmutations of world in
everydirection, had spontaneously entered as his own life had dwindled, faded, and at last—for a
moment, anyhow—entirely shut down.
He had died.
But he was now again alive.
Where, then? Not where he had lived before.
The THL soldier's face, customary and natural, hung within the diminished, constricted aperture through
which reality showed, a face relieved of the intrusion of hell-attributes. As long, Rachmael realized, as I
keep that face in front of me, I'm okay. And if he talks. That would do it; that would get me through.
But he won't, he realized. He tried to kill me; he wants me dead. Hedid kill me. This man—this sole link
with outside—is my murderer.
He stared at the face; in return, the eyes glared un-winkingly back, the owl eyes of cruelty that loathed
him and wanted him dead, wanted him to suffer. And the THL soldier said nothing; Rachmael waited and
heard no sound, even after years—a decade passed and another began and still no word was spoken.
Or if it was he failed to hear it.
"Goddam you," Rachmael said. His own voice did not reach him; he felt his throat tremble with the
sound, but his ears detected no change, nothing. "Do some-thing," Rachmael said. "Please."
The soldier smiled.
"Then you can hear me," Rachmael said. "Even af-ter this long." It was amazing that this man still lived,
after so many centuries. But he did not bother to reflect on that; all that mattered was the uninterrupted
realness of the face before him. "Say something," Rachmael said, "or I'll break you." His words weren't
right, he realized. Meaningful, familiar, but somehow not cor-rect; he was bewildered. "Like a rod of
iron," he said. "I will dash you in pieces. Like a potter's vessel. For I am like a refiner's fire." Horrified, he
tried to compre-hend the warpage of his language; where had the con-ventional, everyday—
Within him all his language disappeared; all words were gone. Some scanning agency of his brain, some
organic searching device, swept out mile after mile of emptiness, finding no stored words, nothing to
draw on: he felt it sweeping wider and wider, extending its oscilla-tions into every dark reach,
overlooking nothing; it wanted, would accept, anything, now; it was desperate. And still, year after year,
the empty bins where words, many of them, had once been but were not now.
He said, then,"Tremens factus sum ego et timeo." Because out of the periphery of his vision he had
ob-tained a clear glimpse of the progress of the brilliant light-based drama unfolding silently."Libere
me," he said, and repeated it, once, twice, then on and on, without cease."Libere me Domini," he said,



and for a hundred years he listened, watched the events projected soundlessly before him, witnessed
forever.
"Let go of me, you bastard," the THL soldier said. His hands grasped Rachmael's neck and the pain was
vast beyond compare; Rachmael let go and the face mocked him in leering hate. "And enjoy your
expanded consciousness," the soldier said with malice so over-whelming that Rachmael felt throughout
him unen-durable somatic torment which came and then stayed.
"Mors scribitum,"Rachmael said, appealing to the THL soldier. He repeated it, but there was no
response."Misere me," he said, then; he had nothing else available, nothing more to draw on."Dies
Irae," he said, trying to explain what was happening inside him."Dies Illa." He waited hopefully; he
waited years, but no help, no sound, came. I won't make it, he realized then.Time has stopped. There is
no answer.
"Lots of luck," the face said, then. And began to recede, to move away. The soldier was leaving.
Rachmael hit him. Crushed the mouth. Teeth flew; bits of broken white escaped and vanished, and
blood that shone with dazzling flame, like a flow of new, clear fire, exposed itself and filled his vision; the
power of illumination emanating from the blood overwhelmed everything, and he saw only that—its
intensity stifled everything else and for the first time since the dart had approached him he felt wonder, not
fear; this was good.
This captivated and pleased him, and he contemplated it with joy.
In five centuries the blood by degrees faded. The flame lessened. Once more, drifting dimly behind the
breathing color, the lusterless face of the THL soldier could be made out, uninteresting and unimportant,
of no value because it had no light. It was a dreary and tiresome specter, long known, infinitely boring; he
ex-perienced excruciating disappointment to see the fire decrease and the THL soldier's features
re-gather. How long, he asked himself, do I have to keep seeing this same unlit scene?
The face, however, was not the same. He had broken it. Split it open with his fist. Opened it up, let out
the precious, blinding blood; the face, a ruined husk, gaped disrobed of its shell: he saw, not the mere
outside, but into its genuine works.
Another face, concealed before, wriggled and squeezed out, as if wishing to escape. As if, Rachmael
thought, it knows I can see it, and it can't stand that. That's the one thing it can't endure.
The inner face, emerging from the cracked-open gray-chitin mask, now tried to fold up within itself,
at-tempted vigorously to wrap itself in its own semi-fluid tissue. A wet, limp face, made of the sea,
dripping, and at the same time stinking; he smelled its salty, acrid scent and felt sick.
The oceanic face possessed a single multi-lensed eye. Beneath the beak. And when it opened its
toothless mouth the wideness of the cavity divided the face en-tirely; the mouth separated the face into
two un-connected equal parts.
"Esse homo bonus est,"Rachmael said, and won-dered numbly why such a simple statement asTo be a
man is good sounded so peculiar to his ears."Nonhomo," he said, then, to the squashed, divided
sea-face,"video. Atque malus et timeo; libere me Domini." What he saw before him was not a man,
not a man's face, and it was bad and it frightened him. And he could do nothing about it; he could not
stop seeing it, he could not leave, and it did not go away, it would never go because there was no time at
work, no possibility of change; what confronted him would peer at him forever, and his knowledge of it



would dwell inside him for an equal duration, passed on by him to no one because there was no one.
"Exe," he said, helplessly; he spoke pointlessly, knowing it would do no good to tell the creature to go
away, since there was no way by which it could; it was as trapped as he, and probably just as terrified.
"Amicus sum," he said to it, and won-dered if it understood him."Sumus amici," he said, then, even
though he knew it was not so; he and the thing of water were not friends, did not even know what the
other consisted of or where it had come from, and he himself, in the dull, sinking dark red expiration of
decaying time, time at its wasted and entropic final phase, would stay grafted in this spot confronted by
this unfamiliar thing for a million years ticked away by the ponderous moribund clock within him. And
never in all that great interval would he obtain any news as to what this ugly deformed creature signified.
It means something, he realized. This thing's ocean-face; its presence at the far end of the tube, at the
outer opening where I'm not, that isn't a hallucinated event inside me—it's here for a reason; it drips and
wads itself into glued-together folds and stares without winking at me and wants to keep me dead, keep
me from ever get-ting back.Not my friend, he thought. Or rather knew. It was not an idea; it was a
concrete piece of observed reality outside: when he looked at the thing he saw this fact as part of it: the
non-friend attribute came along in-separably. The thing oozed; it oozed and hated to-gether. Hated him,
and with absolute contempt; in its oversplattering liquid eye he perceived its derision: not only did it not
like him, it did not respect him. He wondered why.
My god, he realized. It must know something about me. Probably it has seen me before, even though I
haven't seen it. He knew, then, what this meant.
It had been here all this time.

10

In a pleasant living room he sat, and across from him a stout man with good-intentioned features gnawed
on a toothpick, eyed him with a compound of tolerant amusement and sympathy, then turned to grunt at a
thin-faced middle-aged dapper man wearing gold-rimmed glasses who also watched Rachmael, but with
a severe, virtually reproving frown.
"Finally coming back for a couple breaths of real air," the stout man observed, nodding toward
Rach-mael.
"There's no such thing as real air," a woman seated across from the two of them said; dark-skinned, tall,
with acutely penetrating chitin-black eyes, she scruti-nized Rachmael and he imagined for an instant that
he was seeing Freya. "All air is real; it's either that or no air at all. Unless you think there's something
calledfalseair."
The stout man chuckled, nudged his companion. "Listen to that; you hear that? I guess everything you
see is real, then; there's no fake nothing." To Rachmael he said, "Everything including dying and being
in—"
"Can't you discuss all those sorts of things later?" a blond curly-haired youth at the far end of the room
said irritably. "This is a most particularly important sum-mation he's making, and after all, he is our elected
president; we owe him our undivided attention, every one of us." His gaze traveled around the tastefully
fur-nished room, taking all of the people in, including Rachmael. Eleven persons in addition to himself, he



realized; eleven and me, but what is me? Am I what? His mind, clouded, dwelt in some strange overcast
gloom, an obscuring mist that impeded his ability to think or to understand; he could see the people, the
room also. But he could not identify this place, these people, and he wondered if the breach with that
which had been familiar was so complete as to include himself; had his own physical identity, his
customary self, been eradicated too, and some new gathering of matter set in its place? He examined his
hands, then. Just hands; he could learn nothing from them, only that he did have hands and that he could
see them—he could see every-thing, with no difficulty. Colors did not rise out of the walls, drapes, prints,
the dresses of the seated, casual women; nothing distorted and magnified floated as a median world
between this clearly tangible environment and his own lifelong established percept-system.
Beside him suddenly an attractive tall girl bent and said close to his ear, "What about a cup of syn-cof?
You should drink something hot. I'll fix it for you." She added, "Actually it's imitation syn-cof, but I know
you know we don't have the genuine product here, ex-cept in April."
An authoritative-looking middle-aged man, bony, hard-eyed with an intensity that implied a ceaseless
judging of everyone and everything, said, "This is worse than 'real air.' Now we're talking about genuine
synthetic coffee. I wonder what a syn-cof plant would look like growing in a field. Yes, that's the crop
Whale's Mouth ought to invest in; we'd be rich in a week." To the woman beside him, a white-oak
blonde, he said, "After all, Gretch, it's a cold hard fact that every god-dam syn-cof plant or shrub or
however the dratted stuff grows back on Terra got—how's it go? Sing it for me, Gretch." He jerked his
head toward Rachmael. "Him, too; he's never heard your quaint attempts to blat out authentic Terran folk
songs."
The white-oak blonde, in a listless, bored voice, mur-mured half to herself, half to Rachmael whom she
was now eying, " 'The little boy that held the bowl/Was washed away in the flood.' " She continued to
con-template Rachmael, now with an expression which he could not read. "Flood," she repeated, then,
her light blue eyes watchful, alert for his reaction. "See anything resembling—"
"Shut up and listen," the curly-haired youth said loudly. "Nobody expects you to grovel, but at least
show the proper respect; this man—" He indicated the TV screen, on which Omar Jones, in the fashion
long-familiar to Rachmael, boomed cheerily away; the President of Newcolonizedland at this moment
was dilating on the rapture of one's first experience at seeing a high-grade rexeroid ingot slide from the
backyard atomic furnace, which, for a nominal sum, could be in-cluded in the purchase of a home at the
colony—and at virtually no money down. The usual pitch, Rachmael thought caustically; Terra and its
inhabitants had listened to this, watched this dogged P.R. tirade in all its many variants, its multiple
adaptations to suit every oc-casion. "This man," the curly-haired youth finished, "is speaking forus; it's
everyone here in this room up there on that screen, and as President Jones himself said in that press
release last week, to deny him is for us to repudiate our own selves." He turned to a large-nosed dour
individual hunched over beside him, a mildly ugly unmasculine personage who merely grimaced and
con-tinued his state of absorption in Omar Jones' monolog.
The familiar tirade—but to these people here?
And—Freya. Where was she? Here, too . . . whereverhere was?
Not now, he realized with utter hopelessness. I won't find her now.
Appealing to everyone in the room the curly-haired youth said, "I don't intend to be a weevil for the
whole damn balance of my life. That's one thing I can tell you." In abrupt restless anger, a spasm of anger
that convulsed his features, he strode toward the large image on the TV screen.



Rachmael said thickly, "Omar Jones. Where is he speaking from?"This could not be Whale's Mouth.
This speech, these people listening—all of this, every-thing he saw and heard, ran contrary to reason,
was in fact just plain impossible. At least was if Omar Jones consisted of a manufactured fake. And he
was; there lay the entire point.
If this were Whale's Mouth, these people had to know that as well as he did. But—possibly the THL
soldier, after shooting him with the LSD-tipped dart, had carted him to a Telpor station and dumped him
back to the Sol System and Earth, the planetary system out of which he—grasping his time-warping
construct cammed as a tin of Yucátan helium-powered bootlegged prophoz—had so recently emerged.
And Freya. Back on Earth? Or dead at Whale's Mouth, dead here, if this was actually the colony . . . but
it was riot. Because this and only this explained the credulous participation by the people in this room in
the hypnotic, droning oration of the man on the TV screen. They simply did not know. So he was not on
the ninth planet of the Fomalhaut system any longer; no doubt of it at all. The invasion by the two
thousand seasoned field reps from Lies Incorporated had failed; even with UN assistance, with UN
control of all Telpor stations, UN troops and advanced weapons—Rachmael closed his eyes wearily as
acceptance of the terrible obvious fact ate out of existence any illusion that he might have held that THL
could be overturned, that Sepp von Einem could be neutralized. Theodoric Ferry had handled the
situation successfully. Faced with the exposure of the Whale's Mouth hoax, Ferry had reacted swiftly and
expertly and now it had all been decided; for one single, limited episode the curtain had been lifted, the
people of Terra had received via the UN's planet-wide communications media a picture ofthe actuality
underlying the elaborate, complicated myth . . .
Then he was not on Terra either. Because, even though THL had in the sudden great showdown toppled
the combined probe constellated out of the resources of its two immense opponents, the citizens of Terra
had already been briefed fully, had already been exposed systematically to the entire truth—and nothing,
short of planet-wide genocide, could reverse that.
It made no sense. Bewildered, he made his way across the room, to the window; if he could see out,
find a landscape familiar or at least some aspect which linked to a comprehensible theory—any
comprehensible theory—that would serve to reorient him in space and time . . . he peered out.
Below, streets wide, with trees blossoming in pink-hued splendor; a pattern of arranged public buildings,
an aesthetically satisfying syndrome clearly planned by master builders who had had at their disposal a
virtually unlimited variety of materials. These streets, these im-pressive, durable buildings, none of the
constructs be-yond the window had come into existence haphazardly. And none seemed destined to
crumble away.
He could not recall any urban area on Terra so free of harsh functional autofacs; either the industrial
com-bines here were subsurface, or cammed into the overall design somehow, disguised so effectively
that they blended even under his own expert scrutiny. And no creditor jet-balloons. Instinctively, he
searched for sign of one; flapples cranked back and forth in their eccen-tric fashion—this much was
familiar. And on the ped-runnels crowds roamed busily, fragmenting at junctions and streaming beyond
the range of his vision intent (this, too, was customary; this was eternal and every-where, a verity of his
life on Terra) on their errands. Life and motion: activity of a dedicated, almost obses-sive seriousness; the
momentum of the city told him that what he saw below had not popped obligingly into exis-tence in
response to his scrutiny. Life here had gone on for a long time before him. There was too much of it, and
far too much kinetic force, to be explained away as a projection of his own psyche; this which he saw
was not delusional, an oscillation of the LSD injected into his blood stream by the THL soldier.
Beside him, the white-oak blonde deftly appeared, said softly in his ear, "A cup of hot syn-cof?" She
paused. Still numbed, Rachmael failed to answer; he heard her, but his bewilderment stifled even a



reflexive response. "It will really make you feel better," the girl continued, after a time. "I know how you
feel; I know very well what you're going through because I remem-ber going through the same
experience myself when I first found myself here. I thought I had gone out of my mind." She patted him,
then, on the arm. "Come on. We'll go into the kitchen."
Trustingly, he found himself accepting her small warm hand; she led him silently through the living room
of people intent on the image of Omar Jones enlarged to godlike proportions on the TV screen, and
presently he and the girl were seated opposite each other at a small brightly decorated plastic-surfaced
table. She smiled at him, encouragingly; still unable to speak he found him-self hopefully smiling back, an
echo resonating in response to her relaxed friendliness. Her life, the proximity of her dynamism, her body
warmth, awoke him minutely but nevertheless critically from his shock-induced apathy. Once again, for
the first time since the LSD dart had plunged into him, he felt himself gain vigor; he felt alive.
He discovered, all at once, a cup of syn-cof in his hand; he sipped and as he did so he tried, against the
weight of the still-formidable apathy that pervaded him, to frame a remark calculated to convey his
thanks. It seemed to require a million years and all the energy available, but the task edified him: whatever
had hap-pened to him and wherever in the name of god he was, the havoc of the mind-obliterating
hallucinogen had by no means truly left his system. It might well be days, even weeks, before he found
himself entirely rid of it; to that he was already stoically resigned.
"Thanks," he managed, finally.
The girl said, "What did you experience?"
Haltingly, with painstaking care, he answered, "I—got an LSD dart in me. Can't tell how long I was
under." Thousands of years, he thought. From the days of Rome to the present. Evolution through
centuries, and each hour a year. But there was no point in com-municating that; he would not be telling
the girl some-thing new. Undoubtedly, when she had lived on Terra, she had been exposed—like
everyone else at one time or another—to at least a residual dose of the chemical lin-gering in one of the
major population center's water supply: the still-lethal legacy inherited from the war of '92, so taken for
granted that it had become a part of nature, not desired but silently endured.
"I asked," the girl repeated, with quiet, almost pro-fessional persuasiveness, fixing the focus of his
atten-tion on her and what she was asking, "what you experi-enced. What did you see? Better to tell
someone now, before it gets dim; later it's very difficult to recall."
"The garrison state," he said hoarsely. "Barracks. I was there. Not long; they got to me fairly fast. But I
did seek."
"Anything else?" The girl did not seem perturbed. But she listened tensely, obviously determined to miss
nothing. "What about the soldier who fired the dart at you? Was there anything about him? Anything
odd? Weird or unexplainable?"
He hesitated. "Christ," he said, "the hallucinations; you know lysergic acid—you're familiar with what it
does. My god—I was inundated by every kind of per-ception. You want to hear about the Day of
Judgment again, in addition to having gone through it yourself? Or the—"
"The soldier," the white-oak-haired girl said pa-tiently.
With a ragged, sharp-pained exhalation, Rachmael said, "Okay. I hallucinated a cyclops, of the
cephalo-podan variety." For an interval he became silent; the effort of putting his recollection into words



exhausted his precariously limited strength. "Is that enough?" he said, then, feeling anger.
"Aquatic?" Her luminous, intelligent eyes bored steadily at him; she did not let him evade her.
"Re-quiring, or evidently requiring—"
"A saline envelope. I could see—" He made himself breathe with regularity, halting his sentence midway.
"Signs of dehydration, cracking, of the dermatoid folds. From the effluvium I'd assume a rapid
evapora-tion of epithelial moisture. Probably indicates a homeo-static breakdown." He looked away, at
that point, no longer able to meet her steady, critical gaze; the strain was too much for his vitiated
powers, his ability to col-lect and maintain his attention. Five years old, he said to himself. The abreaction
of the drug period; regression to the space-time axis of early childhood, along with the limited range of
consciousness, the minute faculties of a preschool-age kid, and this is the topic that has to be dealt with;
this is just too much. And it would be, he thought, even if I could pull out and function as an adult again,
with an adult's ability to reason. He rubbed his forehead, feeling the ache, the constriction; like a deep,
chronic sinusitis which had flared to its most malignant stage. A pain-threshold alteration, he specu-lated
dully. Due to the drug. Routine common discom-fort, ordinary somatic promptings, everything enlarged
to the point of unbearability, and signifying nothing, nothing at all.
Conscious of his grim, introverted silence, the girl said, "Under LSD before, did you ever experience a
physiognomic alteration of this sort? Think back to the initial mandatory episode during your
grammar-school days. Can you remember back that far?"
"That was under a control," Rachmael said. "One of those Wes-Dem Board of Education psychologists,
those middle-age do-gooding ladies in blue smocks who—what the hell did they used to call
themselves?—something like psycheleticians. Or psychedelictrix; I forget which. I guess both groups got
to me at one time or another. And then of course under the McLean Mental Health Act I took it again at
sixteen and again at twenty-three." But the control, he thought; that made all the difference. Someone
there all the time, trained, able to do and say the right thing: able to maintain con-tact with the stable
objectivekoinos kosmos so that I never forgot that what I was seeing emanated from my own psyche,
type-basics, or as Jung once called them, archetypes rising out of the unconscious and swamping the
personal conscious. Out of the collective, supra-personal inner space, the great sea of non-individual life.
The sea, he thought. And that physiognomic trans-formation of the THL soldier; my perception of him
became transmuted along those lines. So I did see a type-basic, as in the previous times; not the same
one, of course, because each episode under the drug is unique.
"What would you say," the girl said, "if I told you that what you saw was not mysticomimetic at all?"
"What I saw," Rachmael said, "could not have been psycheletic; it wasn't an expansion of consciousness
or a rise in the sensitivity of my percept-system."
"Why not?" The girl regarded him keenly. Now two others from the living room, having left the TV set
with its booming image of never-failing President Omar Jones, appeared, the thin, severe man with
gold-rimmed glasses and an elderly woman with collapsed, corru-gated flesh which hung in dismal
wattles, with obviously dyed black, lusterless hair and far too ornate bracelets on her flabby wrists. Both
seemed aware of the direction of conversation which had come before; they listened silently, almost
raptly, and now a third person joined them, a dramatically colored, heavy-lidded woman in evidently her
early thirties, wearing a blue-cotton Mexican-style shirt tied at the waist and open to expose effectively
shaded smooth bare skin; her richly dyed, ex-tremely tight jeans, plus the unbuttoned top of her blouse
beneath the Mexican shirt, caused to be manifest a stunning, supple body—Rachmael found himself
fix-edly contemplating her, no longer aware of the conver-sation in progress.



"This is Miss de Rungs," the thin, severe-featured man with the gold-rimmed glasses said, nodding at the
impressive, deeply hued woman in the Mexican shirt. "And this is Sheila Quam." He indicated the
white-oak-haired girl who had prepared hot syn-cof for Rachmael.
The stout man, still poking at his mouth with his toothpick, appeared at the door of the kitchen, smiled a
warped but friendly smile composed of jagged and irregular teeth and said, "I'm Hank Szantho." He held
out his hand and Rachmael shook. "We're all weevils," he explained to Rachmael. "Like you. You're a
weevil; didn't you know it? What paraworld did you tie into? Not a really bad one; huh?" He eyed
Rachmael search-ingly, his jaw working, his face coarse with shrewd but in no way malicious interest.
"We're all in the class together," the curly-haired youth said in a bellicose but oddly agitated voice,
speak-ing directly to Rachmael as if challenging him, as if some hidden dispute, beyond Rachmael's
perception, somehow had become involved. "We all have the ill-ness; we all have to get well." He
physically propelled a slender, short-haired, smartly dressed girl with sharply delineated delicate features;
she gazed at Rachmael with a wild, vague anxiety which was almost an appeal—he did not know in
regard to what, since the curly-haired youth—whose shoulders and musculature Rachmael no-ticed for
the first time, appeared unusually escalated in use-value—had released her. "Right, Gretch?" the youth
demanded.
To Rachmael, in a low but entirely controlled voice, the girl said, "I'm Gretchen Borbman." She held out
her hand; reflexively, he shook, and found her skin smooth and lightly cool. "Welcome to our little
revolu-tionary organization, Mr.—" She paused politely.
He gave his name.
"Arab-Israeli?" Gretchen Borbman said. "From the Federation of Semitic Peoples? Or from that
drayage firm that used to be so big and now's disappeared . . . Applebaum Enterprise, wasn't it called?
Any relation? What ever happened to it and to that lovely new liner, thatOmphalos . . . wasn't that your
flagship?"
It was beyond belief that she did not know; the news media had made a cause célèbre of such
magnitude out of theOmphalos' flight to the Fomalhaut system that no one could fail to know, at least no
one on Terra. But this was not Terra; already, the agreeable, normal milieu of humans in proximity to him,
here, had washed into paleness the grotesque apparition of gummy sea-weed slime that, caked to the
steaming, drying cyclops-face, had stunk so acridly, rinsed in foulness: the degeneration into
hydrokinetically-maintained organic tissue of what had once been—or convincingly appeared to be—a
human being, even if it was a killer-commando mercenary of Trails of Hoffman Limited.
"Yes," he said cautiously, and, deep within the ap-propriate section of his mentational apparatus, a
con-duit carried a warning signal; some sensitized mecha-nism woke and became thoroughly alert. And
did not cease its picket-duty; it would remain in go-position un-til otherwise instructed; his control over it
was virtually nil. "That was—still is—the sole valid asset of our firm. With theOmphalos we're something;
without her we're not." With utmost caution he surveyed the group of people, the weevils, as they called
themselves, to see if any appeared aware of the achingly recent abortive flight to Fomalhaut. None of
them showed any indica-tion; none of them spoke up or even registered a mean-ingful facial expression.
Their joint lack of response, second by second, plunged him into alarmed, acceler-ated confusion. And
he experienced, weirdly and as frighteningly as each time before, an unannounced oscillation of the
drug-state; he felt his time-sense fluc-tuate radically, and everything, all objects and persons in the room,
become changed. The LSD, at least briefly, had returned; this did not surprise him, but it was the wrong
time; this, of all possibilities, he could do without at this palpably crucial moment.



"We get damn near no news from Terra," the stout man with the toothpick, Hank Szantho, said to him . .
. the voice sounded close by, but the man's shape: it had warped into a lurid color collage, the textures of
his flesh and clothes exaggerated, now rapidly becoming grotesque as the light factor doubled and then
doubled again until Rachmael looked into a formless blur of heated metal, red so molten and ominous that
he moved his chair back, away from the sliding slag-like sheet which had replaced the man; behind it
Hank Szantho bobbed, the balloon-head capriciously located, as if by whim, in the vicinity of the collage
of torch-shaped fire which had a moment ago been the body and clothing and flesh of the man.
And yet the man's face, diminished in vigor and solidity as it now was, had undergone no physiognomic
disfiguration; it remained the balanced countenance of a somewhat crude but amiable, tolerant, heavy-set
hu-man.
Astutely, the white-oak-haired girl Sheila Quam said to him, "I see apprehension in your eyes, Mr. ben
Applebaum. Is it the hallucinogen?" To the others she said, "I think it's rephasing within his
brain-metabolism once more; obviously it hasn't as yet been excreted. Give it time. Drink your cup of
syn-cof." Sympatheti-cally, she held it up, between his line of vision and Hank Szantho's nimbus of
radiant color; he managed to fix his attention, make out the cup, accept it and sip. "Just wait; it'll go away.
It always does, and we're very familiar with the illness, both subjectively in ourselves and objectively in
each other. We help each other." She moved her chair closer, to sit beside him; even in his condition he
made note of that, and in addition the fact that this superficially slight maneuver effectively placed her
between him and the dramatic, dark-complexioned woman, Miss de Rungs, and the willowy, attractive
Gretchen Borbman with her springy, near-bobbed chic hair. At this loss he felt sad; a dismal awareness
of his powerlessness burgeoned within him, realization that, in the drug-state, he could not fashion in any
manner whatsoever a change in the flow of sense-data flowing in on him; the authority of the data, their
absoluteness and degree, again reduced him to a passive device which merely registered the stimuli
without responding.
Sheila Quam patted, then took gentle hold of his right hand.
"The illness," Gretchen Borbman said, "is called the Telpor Syndrome. Disjunction of the percept-system
and substitution of a delusional world. It manifests itself—when it does at all—shortly after teleportation.
No one knows why. Only a few get it, a very few. Our-selves, at this present time. We get cured one by
one, get released . . . but there always are new ones, such as yourself, showing up. Don't be worried,
Mr. ben Apple-baum; it is generally reversible. Time, rest, and of course therapy."
"Sorcerer's apprentice therapy," Hank Szantho said, from some vector of space not within Rachmael's
range of sight. "S.A.T., they call it. The cephalic 'wash head-benders; they're in and out of here, even Dr.
Lupov—the big man from Bergholzlei in Switzerland. God, I hate those fnidgwizers; poking and messing
around like we're a bunch of animals."
" 'Paraworld,' " Rachmael said, after what seemed to him an almost unendurably protracted interval, due
to the drug. "What is that?"
"That's what a weevil sees," the older woman with the dough-like folded face-rolls said in a cross,
nagging, fretful voice, as if discussing the subject made her suffer the reoccurrence of some hated
osteogenetic twinge. "Some are just dreadful; it's a terrible, terrible crime that they're allowed to get away
with it, programming us with that as we're on our way over here. And of course we wereassured by
those Telpor technicians that nothing, absolutely nothing of this sort could possibly happen." Her voice,
shrill and accusing, tormented Rachmael's brain, amplified by the drug; the auditory pain became a
fire-sheet, white, brittle, cutting, whirling like a circular saw and he put his hands up to shield his ears.



"For chrissakes," Hank Szantho said angrily, and his voice, also, reverberated hideously, but at a low
pitch, like the shifting of the earth below during a major H-head excavation detonation catastrophically
close. "Don't blame the Telpor people; blame the fruggin' Mazdasts—it's their fault. Right?" He glowered
around at all of them, no longer amiable and easy-going but in-stead harsh, threatening them with his
suspicious, wrathful attention. "Go cut the eye-lense out of a Maz-dast. If you can find one. If you can get
close enough." His gaze, rotating from person to person, fell on Rach-mael, stopped; for an interval he
contemplated him, with a mixture of scorn, outrage, and—compassion. By degrees his indignation ebbed,
then was entirely gone. "It's tough, isn't it, Applebaum? It's no joke. Tell all these people; you saw it,
didn't you? I heard you telling Sheila. Yeah." He sighed noisily, the wind escaping from him as if the knot
of life which regulated the reten-tion of vital oxygen had all at once unraveled itself out of existence.
"Some get a mechanical-construct mysti-comimetism; we call that The Clock."
" 'The Clock,' " Gretchen Borbman murmured, nodding somberly. "That one really isn't there; I don't
believe that ever existed, and anyhow it'd just be like en-countering a simulacrum, only hypnagogic in
origin. A balanced person ought to recover from that without having to go through the class." She added,
obviously to herself, "The goddam class. The goddam unending pointless disgusting class; jesus, I hate it."
She glared swiftly, furiously, around the room. "Who's the Con-trol, today? You, Sheila? I'll bet it's you."
Her tone was withering, and, in Rachmael's auditory percept-system, the ferocity of it created for a
moment a visual hellscape, mercifully fitful in stability; it hovered, superimposed across the surface of the
plastic kitchen table, involving the syn-cof cups, the shaker of sweetex and small simulated silver pitcher
of reconstituted organic butter fat in suspension—he witnessed im-potently the fusion of the harmless
panorama of con-ventional artifacts into a tabular scene of dwarfed obscenity, of shriveled and deranged
indecent entangle-ment among the various innocent things. And then it passed. And he relaxed, his heart
under a load of nausea-like difficulty; what he had, in that fragment of time, been forced to observe
appalled his biochemical substructure. Even though the drug still clung to his mind and perverted it, his
body remained free—and outraged. Already it had had enough.
"Our control," Hank Szantho said, with sardonic sentimentality, then a wink to Rachmael. "Yes, we have
that, too. Let's see, Applebaum; your paraworld, the one the Mazdasts—if they exist—allegedly
programmed you for—all this, of course, took place during telepor-tation while you were
demolecularized—is listed code-wise by the authorities here as the Aquatic Horror-shape version. Damn
rare. Reserved, I suppose, for people who cut up their maternal grandmothers in a former life and fed
them to the family cat." He beamed at Rach-mael, showing huge gold-capped teeth, which, in the
churning froth of excitation induced by the lysergic acid in his brain metabolism, Rachmael experienced as
a display of revolting enormity, a disfigurement that made him clutch his cup of syn-cof and shut his eyes;
the gold-capped teeth triggered off spasm after spasm within him, motion sickness to a degree that he
had never considered possible: it was a recognizable but enlarged to the magnitude of a terminal
convulsion. He hung onto the table, hunched over, waited for the waves of hyperperistalsis to abate. No
one spoke. In the dark-ness of his unlit private hellscape he writhed and fought, coped as best he could
with random somatic abomina-tions, unable even to begin to speculate on the meaning of what had been
said.
"The stuff hitting you bad?" a girl's voice sounded, gently, close to his ear. Sheila Quam, he knew. He
nodded.
Her hand, on the upper part of his neck, rubbing lightly with empathic concern, soothed the demented
fluctuations within control of his malfunctioning, panic-dominated autonomic nervous system; he
under-went a soothing, infinitely longed-for diminution of muscular contraction; her touch had started the
process, the prolonged recovery-period of someone making his way out of the drug-state back to normal
somatic-sensation and time. He opened his eyes, gratefully ex-changed a silent glance with her. She



smiled, and the rubbing, regular contact of her hand increased in sureness; seated close to him, the smell
of her hair and skin enveloping him, she steadily increased the vital tac-tile bridge between them alive; she
made it more pro-found, more convincing. And, gradually, the remote-ness of the reality around him
shifted in degree; once again the people and objects compressed in the small yellow-lit kitchen became
solid. He ceased being afraid even as insight into just how fragmenting this new onrush of the
drug-oscillation had been reached the again-functioning higher centers of his brain.
" 'The Aquatic Horror-shape version,' " he said shakily; he took hold of Sheila Quam's obliging hand,
stopped its motion—it had done its task—and enfolded it in his own. She did not draw away; the cool,
small hand, capable of such restorative powers, such love-inspired healing, was by a frightening irony
almost unbelievably fragile. It was vulnerable, he realized, to almost everything; without his immediate
protection it seemed totally at the mercy of whatever malign, dis-torted into ominous and unnatural shape
destructive entity that blossomed.
He wondered what, within that category, would manifest itself next. For himself—and the rest of them.
And—had this happened to Freya, too? He hoped to god not. But intuitively he knew that it had. And
was still confronting her . . . perhaps even more so than it did him.

11

Around him in the room the faces of the people became, as he listened to the emphatic, virtually strident
pitch of the discussion, suddenly flat and lurid. Like cartoon colors, he thought, and that struck him
wrench-ingly, as very sobering and very chilling; he sat stiffly, unwilling to move, because even the
slightest body mo-tion augmented the oppressive garishness of the crudely painted only quasi-human
faces surrounding him.
The discussion had become a vicious, ear-splitting dispute.
Two opposing explanations of the paraworlds, he realized at last, were competing like live things; the
pro-ponents of each were more and more with each passing instant becoming manic and bitter, and
abruptly he had a complete understanding of the inordinate, murder-ous tenacity of each person in the
room, in fact all of them . . . now no one, even those who had decided to remain in the living room to
admire the jerky, twitching image of President Omar Jones drone out his harangue, had managed to
avoid being sucked in.
Their faces, as Rachmael glanced about, stunned him. Terrible in their animation, their mechanical,
hor-rifyingly relentless single-mindedness, the people around him battled with one another in a
meaningless, formless muck of words; he listened with dread, felt terror at what he perceived; he
cringed—and felt himself cringe—from them, and the desire to hop up and run without destination or the
most vague spatial orienta-tion that might help him locate himself, learn where he was, who these
envenomed antagonists were . . . men and women who, a few intervals ago—seconds, days; under the
LSD it was impossible to be even remotely accurate—had lounged idly before the TV set, listening to a
man who he knew was synthetic, who did not exist, except in the professional brains of THL's sim-elec
designs technicians, probably working out of von Einem's Schweinfort labs.
That had satisfied them. And now—



"It wasn't a programming," the fold-fleshed dyed-haired older woman insisted, blasting the air of the
room with the shivering, ear-crushing shrill of her near-hysterical voice. "It was alack of programming."
"She's right," the thin, severe man with gold-rimmed glasses said in a squeaky, emotion-drenched
falsetto; he waved, flapped his arms in excitement, trying to make himself heard. "We were all supposed
to be falsely programmed so we'd see a paradise, as they promised. But somehow it didn't take with us,
the few of us here in the room; we're the exceptions, and now those bastard 'wash psychiatrists come in
and do the job right."
In vitriolic weariness Miss de Rungs said, to no one in particular, "The hell with it. Leave it up to our
control; let the control worry." She leaned toward Rachmael, unlit cigarillo between her dark lips, "A
match, Mr. ben Applebaum?"
"Who's our control?" he asked as he got out a folder of matches.
Miss de Rungs, with contempt and rasping animosity, jerked her head at Sheila Quam. "Her. This week.
And she likes it. Don't you, Sheila? You just love to make everybody jump. Squirm, squirm, when you
come into the room." She continued to eye Sheila Quam with hateful vindictiveness, then turned away,
sinking into a voiceless interior brooding, cut off from everyone and all verbal interaction in the room with
deliberate and hostile aversion; her dark eyes filmed with loathing.
"What I saw," Rachmael said to Sheila Quam. "Un-der the LSD—that cephalopod. That you
called—Hank Szantho called—the Aquatic Horror-shape. Was that psychedelic? Under the condition of
expanded con-sciousness did I pick up an actual essence and penetrate a hypnoidal screening-field of
some kind? And if that—"
"Oh yes; it was real," Sheila Quam said levelly; her tone was as matter-of-fact as if this was a technical,
pro-fessional discussion, something of academic interest only. "The cephalops of that sort seem to be, or
any-how it's conjectured by anthropologists in the area to be—anyhow it's the most reasonable working
hypoth-esis, which they'll probably have to go on whether they like it or not—is that the cephalopodan
life form ex-perienced as what we refer to as Paraworld Blue, its dominant species, is the indigenous race
that dwelt here before THL showed up with—" She paused, now no longer composed; her face was
hardened and when she again spoke her voice was brisk and sharp. "Good big a-thought-for-this-week
advance weapons. Old papa von Einem's clever monstrosities. The output of Krupp and Sohnen and
N.E.D. filth like that." She abruptly smashed into a repellent chaos the remains of her cigarillo. "During
the Telpor transfer to Whale's Mouth you were fed the routine mandatory crap, but as with the rest of us
weevils it failed to take. So as soon as the LSD dart got you started intuiting within your new
environment, the illusory outer husk rigged up became transparent and you saw within, and of course
when you got a good clear dose of that—"
"What about the other paraworlds?" he said.
"Well? What about them? They're real, too. Just as real. The Clock; that's a common one. Paraworld
Sil-ver; that comes up again and again." She added, "I've been here a long time; I've seen that one again
and again . . . I guess it's not so hard to take as Paraworld Blue. Yours is the worst. Everybody seems to
agree with that. Whether they've seen it or not. When you've gone through Computer Day and fed your
experience into the fniggling thing's banks so that everybody in the class can—"
Rachmael said carefully, "Why different psychedelic worlds? Why not the same one, again and again?"



Sheila Quam raised a thin, expertly drawn eyebrow. "For everyone? The whole class, as long as it
exists?"
"Yes."
After a pause she said, "I don't really know. I've wondered a whole lot of times. So have plenty of other
people who know about it. The 'wash psychiatrists, for instance. Dr. Lupov himself; I heard a lecture he
gave on the subject. He's as no-darn-place as anybody else, and that's what—"
"Why did Miss de Rungs say everyone squirms when you come into the room?" He waited for her
answer; he did not let her off the hook.
Smoking a newly-lit cigarillo placidly, Sheila Quam said, "A control, whoever he is—it varies from one
month to the next; we take turns—has the power to order the euth-x of someone he thinks a menace to
New-colonizedland. There's no board of appeal, anymore; that didn't work. It's a very simple form, now;
I fill it out, get the person's signature, and that's it. Is that cruel?" She eyed him searchingly; evidently the
query was sincere. "Next month, in fact sixteen days from now, it'll be someone else's turn and I'll be
squirming."
Rachmael said, "What's the purpose of the killing? Why has the control been given such power? Such
drastic authority to arbitrarily—"
"There are eleven paraworlds," Sheila said. She had lowered her voice; in the crowded kitchen the
in-furiated, hip-and-thigh argument had terminated by dwindling swiftly away and everyone was mutely
listen-ing to Sheila Quam. Even the de Rungs girl was listen-ing. And her expression of malice had gone;
only a stricken, anticipatory dread showed. The same expres-sion that pervaded the features of each
person in the room. "Twelve," Sheila continued; the presence of the stony, voiceless audience did not
seem either to nonplus her nor to goad her; she continued in the same detached,reasonable fashion. "If
you count this." She gestured, taking in the kitchen and its people and then she tossed her head, indicating
the booming TV set in the living room with the we-bring-you-live-on-tape voice of Presi-dent of
Newcolonizedland, Omar Jones. "I do," she said. "In some ways it's the most bug-built of all of them."
"But the legal, sanctioned murders," Rachmael said, staring at the girl with her glorious white-shiny hair,
her immense guileless blue eyes, and, beneath her turtle-neck sweater, her small, articulated breasts. It
did not seem congruent with her, this capacity, this office; it was impossible to imagine her signing death
decrees. "What's the basis? Or is there a basis?" He heard his voice rise and become almost a snarl. "I
guess there doesn't have to be, not if everyone is locked in." Without consultation with anyone in the class
he had come to that self-evident conclusion; the huddled, resigned air about all of them showed that. He
felt it in himself already, and it was a noxious, almost physically poisonous sensation, to find himself
drawn gradually into this demoralized milieu. Waiting for the control to act, and for whatever reason
served. "You consider these people enemies ofthat state?" He gestured con-vulsively toward the
yammering TV set in the living room, then turned, set down his syn-cof cup with a sharp clatter; across
from him Sheila Quam jumped, blinked—he seized her by the shoulders and half-lifted her to her feet.
Wide-eyed, startled, she returned his gaze fixedly, peering into him, penetrating him back as he focussed
with compassionless, ruthless harshness; she was not afraid, but his grip hurt her; she set her jaw in an
effort to keep still, but he saw, in her eyes, the wince of physical suffering. Suffering and surprise; she had
not expected this, and he could guess why: this was not what one did to the pro tern control.
Pragmatically it was suicidal if not insane.
Sheila, gratingly, said, "All right; possibly someday we'll have to admit—classify—Omar Jones and the
col-ony we've built up here as just one more paraworld. I admit it. But until then this remains the



reference point.Are you satisfied? And until then any alternate distorted subreality perceived by anyone
arriving is judged prima facie evidence that he's in need of a 'wash. And if psychiatric help doesn't bring
him around to the point that you're at now, sharingthis reality instead of—"
Hank Szantho said brusquely, "Tell him what the paraworlds are."
The room, then, was silent.
"Good question," the middle-aged, bony, hard-eyed man said presently.
To Rachmael, Szantho said, "It's von Einem's do-ing."
"You don't know that," Sheila said quietly.
"He's got some razzle-dazzle gadget he's been playing around with at the Schweinfort labs," Szantho
continued. "Undoubtedly stolen from the UN, from where it tests its new top-secret weapons. Okay, I
don't,know that, not like I saw it in action or a schematic or something. But I know that's what's behind
all this damn paraworld stuff; the UN invented that time-warping device recently and then Gregory
Floch—"
"Ploch," Miss de Rungs corrected.
"Gloch," Sheila said bitingly. "Gregory Arnold Gloch. Anyhow, Gloch, Floch, Ploch; what does it
mat-ter?" To Rachmael she said, "That freak who switched sides. Possibly you remember, although all
the news media because of really incredible UN pressure more or less squelched it, right down the line."
"Yes," he said, remembering. "Five or six years ago." Greg Gloch, the peculiar UN progeny prodigy, at
that time beyond doubt the sole genuinely promising new wep-x designer at the Advance-weapons
Archives, had, obviously for financial reasons, defected to a private industrial concern which could pay
considerably better: Trails of Hoffman. And from there had beyond question passed directly to
Schweinfort and its mam-moth research facilities.
"From that time-warpage wingding," Hank Szantho continued, appealing to each of them with jerky,
rapid gesticulations. "What elsecould it be? I guess nobody can say because there isn't nothing; it has to
be that."
He tapped his forehead, nodding profoundly.
"Nonsense," Miss de Rungs retorted. "A variety of alternate explanations come to mind. Its resemblance
to the UN's time-warpage device may be merely—"
"To be fair about this," the middle-aged, hard-eyed man said in a quiet but effective monotone, "we must
acquaint this newcomer with each of the major logical alternatives to Mr. Szantho's stoutly defended but
only theoretically possible explanation. Most plausible of course—Szantho's theory. Second—in my
opinion, at least—the UN itself, since they are the primary utilizers of the device . . . and it is, as Mr.
Szantho pointed out, their invention, merely pirated by Gloch and von Einem. Assuming it was obtained
by von Einem at all, and proof of this either way is unfortunately not available to us. Third—"
"From here on," Sheila said to Rachmael, "the plausibility swiftly diminishes. He will not recount the stale
possibility that the Mazdasts are responsible, a frightening boogyman we've had to live with but which no
one seriously believes, despite what's said again and again. This particular possible explanation properly



belongs in the category of the very neurotic, if not psychotic."
"And in addition," Miss de Rungs said, "it may be Ferry alone, with no help from anyone; from von
Einem or Gloch. It may be that von Einem is absolutely unaware of paraworlds per se. But no theory can
hold water if it assumes that Ferry is ignorant."
"According to you," Hank Szantho muttered.
"Well," Sheila said, "weare here, Hank. This pa-thetic colony of weevils. Theo Ferry put us here and
you know it. THL is the underlying principle governing the dynamics of this world, whatever category this
world falls into: pseudo-para or real or full para." She smiled grimacingly at Hank Szantho who returned
her bril-liant, cold glare dully.
"But if the paraworlds are derived via the UN's time-warpage gadget," the hard-faced middle-aged man
said, "then they would constitute a spectrum of equally-real alternative presents, all of which split off at
some disputed episode in the past, some antediluvian but crit-ical juncture which someone—whoever it
is—tinkered with through the damn gadget we're discussing. And so in no sense are they merely 'para.'
Let's face that honestly; if the time-warpage gadget is involved then we might as well end all speculation
as to which world is real and which are not, because the term becomes mean-ingless."
"Meaningless theoretically," Miss de Rungs an-swered, "but not to anyone here in this room. Or in fact
anyone in the world." She corrected herself, "Anyone inthis world. We have a massive stake in seeing to
it that the other worlds, para or not, stay as they are, since all are so very much worse than this one."
"I'm not even certain about that," the middle-aged man said, half to himself. "Do we know them that
thoroughly? We're so traumatized about them. Maybe there's one that's better, to be preferred." He
gestured in the direction of the living room with its logorrheic flow of TV noise, the pompous, unending,
empty spout-ing-forth of jejune trash by the nonreal president of what Rachmael—as well as everyone
else on Terra—knew to be a nonreal, deliberately contrived and touted hoax-colony.
"But this world can't be para," Gretchen Borbman said, "because we all share it, and that's still our sole
criterion, the one point we can hang onto." To Rach-mael she said, "That's so important. Because what
no one has laid on you yet, mercifully, is the fact that if two of us ever agree at the same time—" She
lapsed into abrupt silence, then. And regarded Sheila with a mix-ture of aversion and fear. "Then out
come the proper forms," she went on, at last, with labored difficulty. "Form 47-B in particular."
"Good old 47-B," the curly-haired youth said gratingly, and instantly grimaced, his face contorted. "Yes,
we just love it when that's trotted out, when they run their routine check of us."
"The control," Gretchen continued, "signs 47-B after he or she—she, right now—feeds someone's
para-world gestalt in on Computer Day, which is generally late Wednesday. So after that it becomes
public prop-erty; it isn't simply a subjective delusional realm or a subjective anything; it's like an exhibit of
antique potsherds under glass in a museum; the entire damn public can file past and inspect it, right down
to the last detail. So there would hardly be any doubt if ever two individual paraworlds agreed
simultaneously."
"That's what we dread," the fold-fleshed older woman with lifeless dyed hair said in a toneless,
me-chanical voice, to no one in particular.
"That's the one thing," Gretchen said, "that really does scare us, Mr. ben Applebaum; it really does." She
smiled, emptily, the expression of acute, unvarying ap-prehension calcified into sterile hopelessness over



all her features, a mask of utter despair closing up into im-mobility her petite, clear-hewn
face—clear-hewn, and frozen with the specter of total defeat, as if what she and the rest of them dreaded
had crept recently close by, far too close; it was no longer theoretical.
"I don't see why a bi-personal view of the same paraworld would—"Rachmael began, then hesitated,
appraising Sheila. He could not, however, for the life of him fathom her contrived, cool poise; he made
out nothing at all and at last gave up. "Why is this regarded as so—injurious?"
"Injurious," Hank Szantho said, "not to us; hell no—not to us weevils. On the contrary; we'd be better
able to communicate among each other. But who gives a gruff about that . . . yeah, who cares about a
little miniscule paltry matter like that—a validation that might keep us sane."
Sheila said, remotely, " 'Sane.' "
"Yes, sane," Hank Szantho snarled at her.
"Folie à deux," Sheila said mildly. To Rachmael she said, "No, not injurious to us, of course. To them."
She once more indicated the empty living room—empty except for the din of Omar Jones' recorded
unending monolog. "But you see," she explained to Rachmael, raising her head and confronting him
tranquilly, "it wouldn't just be real; that is, real in the experiential sense, the way all LSD and similar
psycheletic drug-experiences are . . . they're real, but if one of the ex-periences is common to more than
a single individual the implications are quite great; being able to talk about it and be completely
understood is—" She gestured faintly, as if her meaning at this point was obvious, scarcely worth
articulating.
"It would be coming true," Miss de Rungs said in a stifled, unsteady voice. "Replacingthis." She ejected
the end word violently, then swiftly once again sank into her withdrawn brooding.
The room, now, was tomb-like still.
"I wonder which one," Hank Szantho said, half-idly, to himself but audibly. "The Blue, ben Applebaum?
Yours? Or Paraworld Green, or White, or god knows which. Blue," he added, "is about the worst.
Yeah, no doubt of that; it's been established for some time. Blue is the pit."
No one spoke. They all, wordlessly, looked toward Rachmael. Waiting.
Rachmael said, "Has any of the rest of you—"
"None of us, obviously," Miss de Rungs said, with rigid, clipped firmness, "has undergone Paraworld
Blue. But before us—several, I believe, and fairly re-cently. Or so the 'wash psychiatrists say, anyhow, if
you can believe them."
"But not all of us," Gretchen Borbman said, "have been before the computer, yet. I haven't, for instance.
It takes time; the entire memory area of the cerebral cortex has to be tapped cell by cell, and most of the
retention in stored form of the experience is subliminal. Repressed from consciousness, especially in the
case of—less favorable paraworlds. In fact the episode in its entirety can be split off from the self-system
within minutes af-ter the person regains contact with reality, in which case he has absolutely no
knowledge—available, conscious knowledge, that is—of what happened to him."
"And a pseudo-memory," Hank Szantho added, rubbing his massive jaw and scowling. "Substituted
automatically. Also a function beyond conscious con-trol. Paraworld Blue . . . who in his right mind, who



wants tokeep his frugging right mind,would recall it?"
Gretchen Borbman, impassive, drained and pale, went to pour herself a fresh cup of the still-warm
syn-cof; the cup clattered as she maneuvered it clumsily. With iron-rigid fixity all of them maintained a
state of contrived obliviousness toward her, pretended not to hear the tremor of her nervous hands as she
carried her cup step by step back to the table, and, with painstaking caution, seated herself beside
Rachmael. None of the other weevils showed any sign whatever of perceiving her existence in their midst,
now; they fixedly kept their eyes averted from her halting movement across the small, densely occupied
kitchen, as if she—and Rach-mael—did not exist. And the emotion, he realized, was stricken terror. And
not the same amorphous uneasiness of before; this was new, far more acute, and beyond dispute
directed absolutely at her.
Because of what she had said? Obviously that; the ice-hard suspension of the normal sense of well-being
had set in the moment Gretchen Borbman had said what seemed to him, on the surface, to be routine:
that she, among others in this group, had not presented the con-tents of their minds, their delusional—or
expanded-consciousness-derived—paraworld involvement. The fear had been there, but it had not
focussed on Gretchen until she had admitted openly, called attention to the fact, that she in particular
viewed a paraworld which might conform thoroughly to that of someone else in the group. And therefore
would, as Miss de Rungs had said, would then be coming true; coming true and replacing the
environment in which they now lived . . . an environment which enormously powerful agencies intended
for extremely vital reasons to maintain.
—Agencies, Rachmael thought caustically, which I've already come up against head-on. Trails of
Hoffman Limited, with Sepp von Einem and his Telpor device, and his Schweinfort labs. I wonder, he
thought, what has come out of those labs lately. What has Gregory Gloch, the renegade UN wep-x
sensation, thrashed together for his employers' use?And is it already avail-able to them? If it was, they
had no need for it as yet; their mainstays, their conventional constructs, seemed to serve adequately; the
necessity for some bizarre, quasi-genius, quasi-psychotic, if that fairly delineated Gloch, did not appear to
be yet at hand . . . but, he realized somberly, it had to be presumed that Gloch's contribution had long
ago evolved to the stage of tac-tical utility: when needed, it would be available.
"It would seem to me," Gretchen Borbman said to him, evidently more calm, now, more composed,
"that this rather dubious 'reality' which we as a body share—I'm speaking in particular, of course, of that
obnoxious Omar Jones creature, that caricature of a political leader—has damn little to recommend it.
Do you feel loyalty to it, Mr. ben Applebaum?" She surveyed him critically, her eyes wise and searching.
"If it did yield to a different framework—" Now she was speaking to all of them, the entire class crowded
into the kitchen. "Would that be so bad? The paraworld you saw, Para-world Blue. Was that so much
worse, really?"
"Yes," Rachmael said. It was unnecessary to com-ment further; certainly no one else in the tense,
over-packed room needed to be convinced—the expressions on their strained faces ratified his
recognition. And he saw, now, why their unified apprehension and animos-ity toward Gretchen Borbman
signified an overwhelm-ing, ominous approaching entity: her exposure before the all-absorbing scanner of
the computer in no sense represented one more repetition of the mind-analysis which had taken place
routinely with the others in the past.Gretchen already knew the contents of her paraworld. Her
reaction had come long ago, and in her manner now consisted, for the others in the group, a clear index
of what that paraworld represented, which of the designated categories it fell into. Obviously, it was a
decidedly familiar one—to her and to the group as a whole.
"Perhaps," the curly-haired youth said acidly, "Gretch might be less entranced with Paraworld Blue if she
had undergone a period stuck in it, like you did, Mr. ben Applebaum; what do you say to that?" He



watched Rachmael closely, scrutinizing him in anticipation of his response; he obviously expected to see
it, rather than hear it uttered. "Or could she have already done that, Mr. ben Applebaum? Do you think
you could tell if she had? By that I mean, would there be any indication, a permanent—" He searched for
the words he wanted, his face working.
"Alteration," Hank Szantho said.
Gretchen Borbman said, "I'm quite satisfactorily an-chored in reality, Szantho; take my word for it. Are
you? Every person in this room is just as involved in an involuntary subjective psychotic
fantasy-superimposition over the normal frame of reference as I am; some of you possibly even more so.
I don't know. Who knows what takes place in other people's minds? I frankly don't care to judge; I don't
think I can." She deliberately and with superbly controlled unflinching dispassion returned the remorseless
animosity of the ring of persons around her. "Maybe," she said, "you ought to re-examine the structure of
the 'reality' you think's in jeopardy. Yes, the TV set." Her voice, now, was harsh, overwhelming in its
caustic vigor. "Go in there, look at it; look at that dreadful parody of a president—is that what you prefer
to—"
"At least," Hank Szantho said, "it's real."
Eying him, Gretchen said, "Is it?" Sardonically, she smiled; it was a totally inhumane smile, and it was
di-rected to all of them; he saw it sweep the room, wither-ing into dryness the accusing circle of her
group-members—he saw them palpably retreat. It did not in-clude him, however; conspicuously,
Gretchen exempted him, and he felt the potency, the meaning of her deci-sion to leave him out: he was
not like the others and she knew it and so did he, and it meant something, a great deal. And he thought, I
know what it means. She does, too.
Just the two of us, he thought; Gretchen Borbman and I—and for a good reason.Alteration, he thought.
Hank Szantho is right.
Tilting Gretchen Borbman's face he contemplated her eyes, the expression in them; he studied her for an
unmeasured time, during which she did not stir: she re-turned, silently, without blinking, his steady,
probing, analytical penetration of her interior universe . . . neither of them stirred, and it began to appear
to him, gradually, as if a melting, opening entrance had replaced the unyielding and opaque coloration of
her pupils; all at once the variegated luminous matrices within which her substance seemed to lodge
expanded to receive him—dizzy, he half-fell, caught himself, then blinked and righted himself; no words
had passed be-tween them, and yet he understood, now; he had been right. It was true.
He rose, walked unsteadily away; he found himself entering the living room with its untended blaring TV
set—the thing dominated the room with its howls and shrieks, warping the window drapes, walls and
carpets, the once-attractive ceramic lamps . . . he sensed and witnessed the deformity imposed by the
crushing din of the TV set with its compulsively hypomanic dwarfed and stunted figure, now gesticulating
in a speeded-up frenzy, as if the video technicians had allowed—or induced—the tape to seek its
maximum velocity.
At sight of him the image, the Omar Jones thing, stopped. Warily, as if surprised, it regarded him—at
least seemed to; impossibly, the TV replica of the colony president fixed its attention as rigidly on him as
he in return found himself doing. Both of them, caught in an instinctive, fully alert vigil, neither able to look
away even for a fraction of an instant . . . as if, Rachmael thought, our lives, the physical preservation of
both of us, has cataclysmically and without warning become jeopardized.
And neither of us, he realized as he stared un-winkingly at the TV image of Omar Jones, can escape;



we're both snared. Until or unless one of us can—can do what?
Blurred, now, as he felt himself sink into numbed fatigue, the two remorseless eyes of the TV figure
began to blend. The eyes shifted, came together, superimposed until all at once, locked, they became a
clearly defined single eye the intensity of which appalled him; a wet, smoldering greatness that attracted
light from every source, drew illumination and authority from every
direction and dimension, confronted him, and any possibility of looking away now was gone.
From behind him Gretchen Borbman's voice sounded. "You see, don't you? Some of the paraworlds
are—" She hesitated, perhaps wanting to tell him in such a manner as to spare him; she wanted him to
know, but with the least pain possible. "—hard to detect at first," she finished, gently. Her hand, soothing,
com-forting, rested on his shoulder; she was drawing him away from the image on the TV screen, the
oozing cy-clopean entity that had ceased its speeded-up harangue and, in silence, emanated in his
direction its diseased malevolence.
"This one," Rachmael managed to say hoarsely, "has a description, too? A code-identification?"
"This," Gretchen said, "is reality."
"Paraworld Blue—"
Turning him around by physical force to face her, Gretchen said, stricken, " 'Paraworld Blue'? Is that
what you see? On theTV screen? I don't believe it—the aquatic cephalopod with one working eye? No;
I just don't believe it."
Incredulous, Rachmael said, "I . . . thought you saw it. Too."
"No!" She shook her head violently, her face now hardened, masklike; the change in her features came
to him initially, in the first particle of a second, as a mere idea—and then the actual jagged carving of old,
shred-ding wood replaced the traditional, expected flesh, wood burned, carbonized as if seared both to
injure it and to create fright in him, the beholder: an exaggerated travesty of organic physiognomy that
grimaced in a fluidity, a mercury-like flux so that the irreal emotions revealed within the mask altered
without cease, some-times, as he watched, several manifesting themselves at once and merging into a
configuration of affect which could not exist in any human—nor could it be read.
Her actual—or rather her normally perceived—features, by a slow process, gradually re-emerged. The
mask sank down, hidden, behind. It remained, of course, still there, but at least no longer directly
confronting him. He was glad of that; relief passed through him, but then it, too, like the sight of the
scorched-wood mask, sank out of range and he could no longer recall it.
"Whatever gave you the idea," Gretchen was saying, "that I saw anything likethat? No, not in the
slightest." Her hand, withdrawn from his shoulder, convulsed; she moved away from him, as if retreating
down a narrow-ing tube, farther and fatally, syphoned off from his presence like a drained insect, back
toward the kitchen and the dense pack of others.
"Type-basics," he said to her, appealing to her, trying to catch onto her and hold her. But she continued
to shrink away anyhow. "Isn't it still possible that only a projection from the unconscious—"
"But your projection," Gretchen said, in a voice raptor-like, sawing, "is unacceptable. To me and to
everybody else."



"What do you see?" he asked, finally. There was almost no sight of her now.
Gretchen said, "I'm scarcely likely to tell you, Mr. ben Applebaum; you can't actually expect that, now,
after what you've said."
There was silence. And then, by labored, unnaturally retarded degrees, a groaning noise came from the
speaker of the television set; the noise at last became in-telligible speech, at the proper pitch and rate: his
categories of perception had again achieved a func-tioning parallel with the space-time axis of the image
of Omar Jones. Or had the progression of the image resumed as before? Time had stopped or the image
had stopped, or perhaps both . . . or was there such a thing as time at all? He tried to remember, but
found himself unable to; the falling off of his capacity for abstract thought—was—what—was—
He did not know.
Something looked at him. With its mouth.
It had eaten most of its own eyes.

12

People who are out of phase in time, Sepp von Einem thought caustically to himself, ought to be dead.
Not preserved like bugs in amber. He glanced up from the encoded intel-repo and watched with distaste
his mysteriously—and rather repellently—gifted proleptic co-worker, Gregory Gloch, in his clanking,
whirring anti-prolepsis chamber; at the moment, the thin, tall, improperly hunched youth talked silently
into the audio receptor of his sealed chamber, his mouth twisting as if composed of some obsolete
plastic, not convincingly flesh-like. The mouth-motions, too, lacked authentic-ity; far too slow, von Einem
observed, even for Gloch. The fool was slowing down. However, the memory spools of the chamber
would still collect everything said by Gloch, at whatever rate. And the transmission subse-quently would
of course be at proper time . . . although, of course, the frequency would be abysmal, probably doubled.
At the thought of the screeching which lay ahead, von Einem groaned.
His groan, received by the sensitive input audio sys-tem of the anti-prolepsis chamber, became
processed: recorded at twenty inches of iron oxide audio tape a second it whipped in retrograde to
rewind, then released itself at six inches a second to be carried to the ear-phones well fixed to Gloch's
bony head. Presently Gloch responded to his reception of his superior's groan with characteristic
eccentricity. His cheeks puffed out; his face turned red as he held his breath. And at the same time he
grinned vacuously, his head lolling, turn-ing himself into a parody of a brain-damaged defective—a
double parody, because it was of course his own fantastic mentational processes which constituted the
actual target of his lampoon. Disgusted, von Einem looked away, gritted his near-priceless
custom-fashioned teeth, returned to his scrutiny of the intel-repo material which had newly been made
available to him.
"I'm Bill Behren," the tinny mechanical voice of the intel-repo transport announced cheerfully. "Operator
of fly 33408. Now, as you may or may not remember, fly 33408 is a real winner. I mean it really gets in
there and tackles its job and really gathers up the stuff, the real hot stuff. I've personally been operator
for, say, fifty flies . . . but in all this time, none has really per-formed true-blue like this little fella. I think



he—or it, whatever they are these days—deserves a vote of thanks from us all involved in this highly
delicate work we do. Right, Herr von Einem?" Operator of housefly 33408 Bill Behren paused hopefully.
"The vote of thanks," von Einem said, "goes to you, Mr. Behren, for your compound eyes."
"How about that," operator Behren rambled on oozingly. "Well, I think we're all inspired by—"
"The data," von Einem said. "As to the activity at the UN Advance-weapons Archives. What specifically
is meant by their code numbervariation three of that time-warping construct they're so devoted to?"
Queer for, he thought to himself; the UN wep-x personnel probably take turns going to bed with it.
"Well, sir," operator Bill Behren of fly33408 answered vigorously, "variation three appears to be a
handy-dandy little portable pack unit in the ingeniousshape of a tin of chocolate-flavored psychic
ener-gizers."
On the video portion of the intel-repo playback system a wide-angle shot of the portable pack
appeared; von Einem glanced toward Gloch in his whirring anti-prolepsis chamber to see if the hunched,
grimacing youth was receiving this transmission. Gloch, however, obviously lagged at least fifteen minutes
behind, now; it would be some time before his synchronizing gear brought this video image to him. And
no way to speed it up; that would defeat the chamber's purpose.
"Did I say 'chocolate-flavored'?" Behren droned on, in agitation. "I intended to say 'chocolate-covered.'
"
And with such weapons artifacts as this, von Einem reflected, the UN expects to survive. Of course, this
assumed that the intel-repo were accurate.
His inquiry into the certainty of fly 33408's informa-tion brought an immediate reaction from operator
Behren.
"There are just plain virtually no houseflies as in-telligent as this; I give you no niddy, Herr von Einem, no
niddy at all. And here's the real substance of what 33408 has captured via his multipartis receptors: I
suggest you prepare for this, as it's overwhelming." Behren cleared his throat importantly. "Ever hear of
ol' Charley Falks?"
"No," von Einem said.
"Think back to your childhood. When you were, say, eight years old or maybe a little more. Recall a
backyard and you playing, and ol' Charley Falks leaning over the fence and—"
"This is what yourverfluchte fly brought back from the UN Advance-weapons Archives?" Time for a
replacement of both Behren and his dipterous insect, both of them with one arboreal, American
orthopterous katydid; it could carry twice the minned receptors and recording spools of 33408 and
probably would possess the same brain-convolutions as Behren and his housefly put together. Von
Einem felt gloomy; in fact his depression bordered on despair. At least Theo Ferry managed to handle
the tricky situation at Whale's Mouth effectively—in contrast to this. And that, more than anything else,
counted.
Effectively except for the unhappy weevils and their destroyed, ridiculous crypto-perceptions. The old
com-rades back in 1945 would have known how to dispatch thoseUnm änner, von Einem thought to
himself with irritable satisfaction. It's a clear sign of genetic decay to be possessed by such subrealities, he



brooded. Inferior type-basics overwhelming weak, unstable character-structures; degenerate idioplasm
involved causally, beyond doubt.
"Ol' Charley Falks," operator Behren said, "is the individual back in your childhood days who more than
any other human being formed your ontological nature. What you have been throughout your adult life
depends absolutely, in total essence, on what ol' Charley—"
"Then," von Einem said witheringly, "why is it that I fail to recall his existence?"
"The UN wep-x tacticians," operator Behren said, "have not as yet placed him there."

Within his anti-prolepsis membrane—the environ-ment manufactured by Krupp und Sohnen years ago
which permitted him to collaborate with the convention-ally time-oriented personalities linked indirectly to
him—the warped, inspired protégé of Sepp von Einem contemplated the message-packets discharged at
intervals by the data-storing houses of his intricate mechanism. As always, he felt weary; the release of
stimuli came too frequently for his overtaxed metab-olism . . . the adjusting of periodic discharge control
gate lay unfortunately outside his manual reach.
What reached him, at the moment, consisted of what seemed the most miserable idiocy he had ever
en-countered; bewildered, he attempted to focus his depleted attention on it, but only ill-formed
fragments of the intel-repo material constellated for his menta-tional scrutiny.
". . . fettered fetus of homemade apples lurching . . . searching . . . something like pataradical outfits of
lace. Iron beds of red hot sabratondea flashes jut jib FRIB—"
Resignedly, Gregory Gloch listened on helplessly, wondering what transistorized turret-control of the
chamber had gone astray this time.
". . . medicine ice
"man.
"cone-shaped melting dripping
"away—away—"
As apathy began to seep over him an interval of almost startling meaning abruptly caught his ear; he
awoke, paid rapt attention.
"Operator Behren, here, with really thrilling data on ol' Charley Falks, who, you'll remember, was placed
in the formative years of Herr von Einem on an alternate time-path by the UN wep-x tacticians in order
to deflect Herr von Einem from his chosen—and militarily signifi-cant—profession to a relatively harmless
vocation, that of—" And then, to his chagrin, the lucid segment of verbal data faded and the meaningless
chatter—with which he had, over the years, become so familiar—resumed.

". . . fiber-glassed. Windows



"stained with grease
"off a polyhemispheric double-overhead-cam
"EXTERNAL compulsion engine
"floating out
"into the vast gigantic money-thing-making machine
". . . diaperashis phenomenon disintegrating
"into foul fierce
"pressure
"spinning spinning
"lifting harsh
"harsh—a breath, a beat—a being still present
"—thank god . . ."

And, in the midst of this, the steady but interrupted by the far stronger signal-strength of the babble, the
authentic intel-repo continued to make its vital point; he brought his internal attention to bear on it and
managed to follow its thread of meaning.
Evidently fly-technician Behren had gathered at last the crucial material as to the UN's disposition of its
near-absolute device. With vigorous, virtually relentless logic, Jaimé Weiss, the top-strategist now
working under Horst Bertold—he who at one time had been von Einem's most brilliant and promising
new discovery in the field of weapons inventiveness, but who had turned: gone over to the better-paying
other side—this renegade had come up with the correct answer to the UN's stra-tegic needs.
To kill off Sepp von Einem was now pointless; Telpor existed. But to abolish von Einem sometime in the
past, before his discovery of the basic mechanism of telepor-tation . . .
A less skilled manipulation of past-time factors would have sought as its objective cheap outright
murder—the total physical elimination of Sepp von Einem. But this, of course, would simply have left the
field open to others, and if one man could locate the principle on which teleportation could be effectively
based, then so, eventually, given enough time, could someone else. Telpor, not Sepp von Einem, had to
be blocked—and it would require the presence of a uniquely strong per-sonality to block it. Jaimé Weiss
and Bertold could not do it; they were not that formidable. In fact, probably only one man in the world
could manage it . . . suc-cessfully.
Sepp von Einem himself.



To himself Gregory Gloch thought, It's a good idea. This, his professional, official appraisal of the tactical
plan which the UN had put in motion to abort the evolution of the Telpor instrument, had now to be said
aloud; Gloch, selecting his words carefully, spoke into the recording microphone permanently placed
before his lips, simultaneously activating the tape-transport.
"They want for their disposal," he declared, "the use of yourself, Herr von Einem—nothing else is
adequate. A compliment . . . but one which you could no doubt do without." He paused, considered.
Meanwhile, the tape-reel moved inexorably, but it was dead tape; he felt the pressure on him to produce
a counter-tactic in response to what those opposed to his superior had so artfully—and
skillfully—advanced. "Umm," he murmured, half to himself. He felt, now, even more truly out of phase in
the time-dimension: he felt the gulf between himself and those, everyone else in the universe of sentient
life, beyond his anti-prolepsis chamber. "In my estimate," he continued, "your most profitable avenue of
action—" And then abruptly he ceased. Because once again the random word-salad noise had burbled
into seeming spontaneous existence in his ears.
This, however, appeared to be a radically different—startling so—interference than was customary.
Rubbish that it was it nonetheless made sense . . . sense, but it had obliterated—for the time being, at
least—his counter-tactical idea.
Could this be a UN electronic signal deliberately beamed so as to disrupt the orderly functioning of his
chamber?
The thought, theoretical as it was, chilled him as he involuntarily, without the possibility of evasion,
lis-tened to the curious mixture of nonsense and—mean-ing. Of the highest order.
". . . I think, though, I see why Zoobko lards, but-ters, marginates and otherwise fattens up the word
'spore' into the rather sinistermale spore slogan. Their house brochure in Move-E 3-D kul-R is directed
(heh-heh) at women consumers, to fumble lewdly a meta-phor, ahem, no offense meant (gak). More fully
articu-lated, it would read, 'The male spore, my dears, is as we well know tireless in its half-crazed
struggle—against all sanity and moral restraint—to reach the female egg. That's the way men are. Right?
We all realize it. Give a male (sic) spore half an inch and he'll take seventy-two-and-a-sixth miles. BE
PREPARED! ALWAYS READY! A HUGE, SLIMY, SLANT-EYED YEL-LOW-SKINNED
MALE SPORE MAY BE WATCH-ING YOU THIS VERY MINUTE! And, considering his almost
demonic ability to wiggle for miles upon miles, you may at this moment be in dire, severe danger! To
quote Dryden: 'The trumpet's loud clamor doth call us to arms,' etc. (And don't forget, ladies, the
hand-some prize awarded yearly by Zoobko Products, Incor-porated for the greatest number of dead
male (sic) spores mailed (pun) to our Callisto factory in an old Irish linen pillow case, attesting to (one)
your tenacity in balking the evil damned things and (two) the fact that you're buying our lather-like goo in
one-hundred-pound squirt cans. Also remember: if you are unable to ade-quately prepare yourself with a
generous, expensive por-tion of Zoobko patented goo in the proper place, ahem, in advance of marital
lawful pawing, then merely squirt the spray can with nozzle directeddirectly into the grimacing fungiform's
ugly face as it hovers six feet high in the air above you. Best range—"
"Best range," Gregory Gloch said aloud, against the din of the obsessive noise in his ears, "approximately
two inches."
"—'two inches,' " the tinny, mechanical racket reeled off, accompanying him, " 'from his eyes. Zoobko's
patented goo is not only—' "
"—'a top-drawer killer of male spores,' " Gloch murmured, " 'but it also blasts the tear-ducts out of



existence. Too bad, fella.' " End brochure, he thought. End monolog. End sex. End of Zoobko, or zoob
of Endko. Is this an ad or a contemplation of a squandered life? Check one. I know this discourse, he
thought. By heart. Why? How? It's as if, he thought, I said it; as if it's happening inside my brain—not
coming to me from the outside.What does this mean? I have to know.
"Always bear in mind," the inexorable din con-tinued, "that male spores have an almost appalling
capacity to progress under their own power. If, ladies, you constantly ponder that—"
"Appalling, yes," Gloch said. "But FIVE MILES?" I said all that, he realized. A long time ago. When I
was a child. But no, he thought; I didn'tsay all that—I thought it, worked it out in my mind, a prank, a
lam-poon, when I was a kid in school. What's being piped to me now here in this goddam chamber,
what's supposed to be rephased sensory-data from the outside world—it's my own goddam former
thoughts returning to me, a loop from my brain to my brain, with a ten-year lag.
"Splub gnog furb SQUAZ," the aud input circuit rattled away, into his passive ears. Relentlessly.
My counter-weapon, Gloch thought. They've blocked my counter-weapon with a counter-weapon, their
own. Who—
"Yes sir, gnog furb," the aud input circuit declared in a hearty but garbled voice, "this is good ol' Charley
Falks' little boy Martha signing off for now, but I'll be back with you soon and with me a few more
chuckles to lighten the day and make things SQUAZ! cheery and bright. Toodeloo!" The voice, then,
ceased. There was only distant background static, not even a carrier wave.
I don't know any little boy named Martha, Gloch thought. And, he realized, there's more wrong; the
a-ending is out of the first Latin declension, so "Martha"can't be a boy's name. Logically, it would have
to be Marthus. Or maybe they didn't know that; Charley Falks didn't know that. Probably not well-read.
As I recall, from what I saw of Charley he was one of those self-educated simps ignorant as hell on the
inside but lathered over on the outside with a thin layer of bits of cultural, scientific, odd, dubious
half-facts which he always liked to drone out for hours on end to whoever was listening or if not listening
then anyhow in the vicinity and so at least potentially within earshot. And then when he got older you
could practically walk off and he'd still be talking, to no one. But then of course I didn't have my chamber
in those days, so my own time-sense was so faulty that what actually lasted only min-utes seemed like
years; at least that's what they told me, those 'wash psychiatrists, back in the early days, when they were
testing me and setting me up so I could func-tion, getting this chamber designed and built.
I wish for chrissake's, he thought mournfully, I could remember the concept for the counter-weapon I
had in mind or almost had in mind or anyhow think I almost had in mind, before that garbage started
coming in over the conduit.
It would have been one hell of a counter-weapon to use against Horst Bertold and the UN. He was sure
ofthat.
Maybe it'll come back to me later, he reflected. Anyhow strictly speaking it was merely the nucleus of
the counter-tactic idea; hardly had begun to grow. Takes time. If I'm not interrupted any further . . . if that
dratted rubbish doesn't start up again promptly the second I begin to really fatten up the original notion
into something Herr von Einem can put to use function-ally, right out into the field to see action in the
overall struggle we're bogged so darn down in at Whale's Mouth and wherever else they're all tangling . .
. prob-ably all over the universe by now; I'm probably six weeks behind, with data stored up ready to be
fed to me from for instance last Thursday if not last year.



Martha, he thought. Let's see: "The Last Rose of Summer" is from that. Who wrote it? Flotow? Lehár?
One of those light opera composers.
"Hummel," the aud input circuit suddenly stated, startling him; it was a familiar, dry, aged male voice.
"Johann Nepomuk Hummel."
"You're a goldmine of misinformation," Gloch said irritably, in response, automatically, to one more of
garrulous ol' Charley Falks' typical tidbits of wrong knowledge. He was so used to it, so darn, wearily
resigned out of long experience. All the way back to his childhood, back throughout the dreary
procession of years.
It's enough to make you wish you were a carpenter, Gloch mused grimly. And didn't have to think, just
measure boards, saw and pound, all that purely physical activity. Then it wouldn't matter what ol' Charley
Falks blabbled out, or what his pest of a kid Martha chimed in with in addition, for that matter; it didn't
matter who said anything, or what.
Damn nice, he thought, if you could go back and live your life over again from the start. Only this time
making it different; getting on the right track for once. A second chance, and with what I know now—
But exactly what did he know now?
For the life of him he couldn't remember.
"Pun, there," the voice from the aud circuit com-mented. "Life of you, life lived over . . . see?" It
chuckled.

13

Within its bow-shaped mouth the half-chewed eyes lay, rolling on the surface of its greedy, licking
tongue. Those not completely eaten, those which still shone with luster, regarded him as they rolled
slightly; they continued to function, although no longer fixed to the bulbed, oozing exterior surface of the
head. New eyes, like tiny pale eggs, had already begun to form, he perceived. They clung in clusters.
He was seeing it. Not a deformed, half-hallucinated, pseudo-image, but the actual presence of the
underlying substrate-entity which inhabited or somehow managed to lodge itself in this paraworld for long
periods of time—possibly forever, he realized with a shudder. Possibly for the total, absolute duration of
its existence.
That might be a time-span of such magnitude as to smother any rational insight; he intuited that. The thing
was old. And it had learned to feed on itself. He won-dered how many centuries had passed before it
had en-countered that method of survival. He wondered what else it had tried first—and what it still
resorted to, when necessary.
There were undoubtedly a number of techniques which it could make use of, when pressed. This act of
consuming its own sensory-apparatus . . . it appeared to be a reflex act, not even consciously done. By
now a mere habit; the creature chewed monotonously, and the luster within the still-watching
half-consumed eyes was extinguished. But already the new ones expanding in clusters against the outer



surface of the head had begun to acquire animation; several, more advanced in devel-opment than the
others, had in a dim way discovered him and were with each passing second becoming more alert. Their
initial interchange with reality involved him, and the realization of this made him sick with disgust. To be
the first object sighted by such semi-autonomous entities—
Hoarsely, its voice thickened by the mouthful which it still continued to chew, the creature said, "Good
morn-ing. I have your book for you. Sign here." One of its pseudopodia convulsed and its tip lathered in
a spasm which, after an interval, fumbled forth a bulky old-style bound-in-boards volume which it placed
on a small plastic table before Rachmael.
"What—book is this?" he demanded, presently. His mind, numbed, refused to interfere as his fingers
poked haphazardly at the handsome gold-stamped book which the creature had presented him.
"The fundamental reference source in this survey in-struction," the cephalopodic organism answered as it
laboriously filled out a long printed form; it made use of two pseudopodia and two writing instruments
simul-taneously, enormously speeding up the intricate task. "Dr. Bloode's great primary work, in the
seventeenth edition." It swiveled the book, to show him the ornate spine. "The True and Complete
Economic and Political History of Newcolonizedland,"it informed him, in a severe, dignified tone of
voice, as if reproving him for his unfamiliarity with the volume. Or rather, he realized suddenly, as if it
assumed that the title would have over-powering influence alone, without additional aid.
"Hmm," he said, then, still nonplussed—to say the least. And he thought, It can't be, but it is. Paraworld
—which?Not precisely as it had manifested itself before; this was not Blue, because his glimpse of that,
ratified by the other weevils, had contained a cyclopsic organism. And this, for all its similarity to the
Aquatic Horror-shape, had by reason of its compound multi-eye system a fundamentally different aspect.
Could this actually be the authentic underlying reality? he wondered. This macro-abomination that
resembled nothing ever witnessed by him before? A grotesque monstrosity which seemed, as he watched
it devour and consume—to its evident satisfaction—the remainder of its eyes, almost a parody of the
Aquatic Horror-shape?
"This book," the creature intoned, "demonstrates beyond any doubt whatsoever that the plan to colonize
the ninth planet of the Fomalhaut system is foolish. No such colony as the projected Newcolonizedland
can possibly be established. We owe a great debt to Dr. Bloode for his complete elucidation of this
complex topic." It giggled, then. A wet, slurred, wobbly giggle of delighted mirth.
"But the title," he said. "It says—"
"Irony," the creature tittered. "Of course. After all, no such colony exists." It paused, then,
contempla-tively. "Or does it?"
He was silent. For some ill-disclosed reason he felt a deep, abiding ominousness in the query.
"I wonder," the creature said speculatively, "why you don't speak. Is it so difficult a question? There is,
of course, that small group of insane fanatics who allege that such a colony in some weird manner or
other actu-ally—" It halted as an ominous shape began—to both its surprise and Rachmael's—to
materialize above its head. "A thing," the creature said, with resigned weari-ness. "And the worst style of
thing in the known uni-verse. I detest them. Do you not also, Mr, ben Apple-baum?"
"Yes," Rachmael admitted. Because the detested ob-ject forming was equally familiar—and
loathsome—to him also.



A creditor balloon.
"Oh, there you are!" the balloon piped at the amor-phous mass of living tissue confronting Rachmael; it
descended, tropic to the eye-eating creature. Obviously, it had located its target.
"Ugh," the eye-eater mumbled in disgust; with its pseudopodia it batted irritably at the invader.
"You must keep your credit-standing up and in good repute!" the balloon squealed as it bobbed and
de-scended. "Your entire—"
"Get out of here," the eye-eater muttered angrily.
"Mr. Trent," the balloon shrilled, "your debts are odious! A great variety of small businessmen will go
into bankruptcy immediately unless you honor your obligations! Don't you have the decency to do so?
Everyone took you for a person who honored his obli-gations, an honorable man who could be trusted.
Your assets will be attached through the courts, Mr. Trent; prepare for legal action to be instigated
starting im-mediately! If you don't make at least a token attempt to pay, the entire net worth of Lies
Incorporated—"
"I don't own Lies Incorporated any more," the eye-eater broke in gloomily. "It belongs to Mrs. Trent,
now. Mrs. Silvia Trent. I suggest you go and bother her."
"There is no such person as 'Mrs. Silvia Trent,' the creditor balloon said, with wrathful condemnation.
"And you know it. Her real name is Freya Holm, and she's your mistress."
"A lie," the eye-eater rumbled ominously; again its pseudopodia whipped viciously, seeking out the agile
creditor balloon, which dipped and bobbed barely be-yond the flailing reach of the several
sucker-im-pregnated arms. "As a matter of fact, this gentleman here—" It indicated Rachmael. "My
understanding is that the lady and this individual are emotionally in-volved. Miss Holm is—was,
whatever—a friend of mine, a very close friend. But hardly my mistress." The eye-eater looked
embarrassed.
Rachmael said to it, "You're Matson Glazer-Holliday."
"Yes," the eye-eater admitted.
"He took this evil manifestation," the creditor balloon shouted, "to evade us. But as you can see, Mr.—"
It regarded Rachmael as it bobbed and drifted. "I believe you are familiar to us, too" it declared, then.
"Are you one of those who has shirked his moral and legal duty, who has failed to honor his financial
obligations? As a matter of fact . . ." It drifted very slowly toward Rachmael. "I think Ipersonally
hounded you not too long ago, sir. You are—" It considered as, within, electronic circuits linked it to its
agency's central computer banks, "ben Applebaum!" it shrilled in triumph. "Zounds! I've caught two
deadbeats AT THE SAME TIME!"
"I'm getting out of here," the eye-eater who was—or once had been—Matson Glazer-Holliday
declared; it began to flow off, uniped-wise, getting free of the situation as quickly as possible . . . and at
Rachmael's expense.
"Hey," he protested weakly. "Don't you go scuttling off, Matson. This is all too damn much; wait, for
god's sake!"



"Your late father," the creditor balloon boomed at him, its voice now amplified by the background data
supplied it by the central computer upon which it depended, "as of Friday, November tenth, 2014, owed
four and one-third million poscreds to the noble firm Trails of Hoffman Limited, and as his heir, you, sir,
must appear before the Superior Court of Marin County, California, and show just cause as to why you
have failed (or if you by a miracle havenot failed but possess the due sum in toto) and if by your failure
you hope to—"
Its resonant voice ceased. Because, in approaching Rachmael the better to harass him, it had forgotten
about the finely probing pseudopodia of the eye-eater.
One of the pseudopodia had whipped about the body of the creditor balloon. And squeezed.
"Gleeb!" the creditor balloon squeaked. "Gak!" it whooshed as its frail structure crumbled. "Glarg!" it
sighed, and then wheezed into final silence as the pseu-dopodium crushed it. Fragments rained down,
then. A gentle pat-pat of terminal sound.
And after that—silence.
"Thanks," Rachmael said, gratefully.
"Don't thank me," the eye-eater said in a gloomy voice. "After all, you've got a lot more troubles than
that pitiful object. For instance, Rachmael, you've got the illness. Telpor Syndrome. Right?"
"Right,"he admitted.
"So it's S.A.T. for you. Good old therapy by Lupov's psychiatrists, probably some second-string hick
we never ought to have voted money to pay for. Some fnigging quab; right?" The eye-eater chuckled, in
a philosophic fashion. "Well, so it goes. Anyhow—what's with you, Rachmael? Lately you've been, um, a
weevil; part of that class and seeing Paraworld Blue . . . is that correct? Yes, correct." The eye-eater
nodded sagely. "And it's just ever so much fun . . . right? With that Sheila Quam as the control, these
days. And form 47-B hanging around, ready to be utilized as soon as two of you experience the same
delusional world. Heh-heh." It chuckled; or rather, Matson Glazer-Holliday chuckled. Rachmael still
found it difficult, if not im-possible, to recall that the pulpy, massive heap of organic tissue confronting him
was Matson.
And—why this shape? Had the creditor balloon been right? Merely to evade the balloon . . . it seemed
an overly extreme ruse to escape. Frankly Rachmael was not convinced; he sensed that more, much
more, lay below the surface of apparent meaning.
Below the surface.Did nothing actual lie at hand? Did everything have to turn out, eventually, to consist
of something else entirely? He felt weary—and resigned. Evidently this remained so. Whether he liked it
or not. Delusional as this might be, obviously it was not acting in conformity tohis wishes. Not in the
slightest.
"What can you tell me," he said, "about Freya?" He set himself, braced against the possibility of horrible,
final news; he waited with cold stoic anticipation.
"Chrissake, she's fine," the eye-eater answered. "Nobody got her; it was me they got. Blew me to bits,
they did."



"But," Rachmael pointed out, "you're alive."
"Somewhat." The eye-eater sounded disenchanted. "You call this being alive? Well, I guess technically
it's being alive; I can move around, eat food, breathe; maybe, for all I know, I can reproduce myself.
Okay, I admit it; I'm alive. Are you satisfied?"
Rachmael said hoarsely, "You're a Mazdast."
"Hell I am."
"But my paraworld," Rachmael said bluntly, "is Paraworld Blue. I've seen the Aquatic Horror-shape,
Matson; I know from firsthand experience what it looks like." He plunged on, then, ruthlessly. "And
you're it."
"Almost." The eye-eater sounded placid; he had not disturbed its potent calm. "But you yourself noticed
crucial differences, son. For example, I possess a multitude of compound eyes; high in protein, they often
provide me—in time of dire want—an ample diet. As I recently demonstrated. Shall I display this neat
faculty once more?" It reached, then, two pseudopodia toward its recently regrown optic organs. "Very
tasty," it in-toned, now apparently engrossed in furthering its meal.
"Wait a moment," Rachmael said thickly. "I find your appetite offensive; for god's sake, wait!"
"Anything," the eye-eater said obligingly, "to please a fellow human being. We both are, you realize. I
am, certainly. After all, I'm the quondam owner of Lies In-corporated; correct? No, I am not a Mazdast;
not one of the primordialUr -inhabitants of Fomalhaut IX. They constitute a low order of organism; I spit
on them." It spat, decisively. In its mind there was no doubt; it detested the Mazdasts. "What I am," it
continued, "is the living embodiment of humanity and not some alien creep-thing that nature was inclined
to spawn on this far-flung, rather degenerate crypto-colony planet. Well, when Computer Day arrives, all
that will be taken care of. You included, you odd life form, you. Heh-heh." It giggled once more. "Now,
that book I loaned you. Dr. Bloode's book. It seems to me that if you want to catch up on the very vital
facts pertaining to Newcolonized-land, you really ought to con it thoroughly. What you want to learn
undoubtedly lies within. Read it! Go on! Heh-heh." Its voice trailed off stickily into an indistinct torrent of
mumbled amusement, and Rachmael felt a surge of doubt, overwhelming doubt, that this was—at least
now—the man he had known as Matson Glazer-Holliday. He sensed its innate alienness. It was, beyond
doubt, nonhuman. To say the least.
With dignity, he answered, "I'll read it when I have time."
"But you'll enjoy it, Mr. ben Applebaum. Not only is the volume educational, but also highly amusing.
Let me quote one of Dr. Bloode's quite singular Thing-isms."
" 'Thingisms'?" Rachmael felt baffled—and wary. He had a deep intuition that the Thingism, whatever it
was, wouldnot be amusing. Not to him, anyhow, or to any human.
"I always enjoyed this one," the eye-eater intoned, its saliva spilling from its mouth as it writhed with glee.
"Consider: since you are about to read the book, here is Thingism Number Twenty, dealing with books.
"Ahem. 'The book business is hidebound.' "
After a pause, Rachmael said, "That's it?"



"Perhaps you failed to understand. I'll give you another gem, one more particular favorite of mine. And if
that fails to move you . . . Oooohhh! That's a Thingism! Listen! 'The representative of the drayage firm
failed to move me.' Oooohhh! How was that?" It waited hopefully.
Baffled, Rachmael said, "I don't get it."
"All right." The eye-eater's tone was now harsh. "Read the book purely for educational purposes, then.
So be it. You want to know the origin of this form which I have taken. Well, everyone will take it, sooner
or later. We all do; this is how we become after we die."
He stared at it.
"While you ponder," the eye-eater continued, "I'll delight you with a few more Thingisms of Dr.
Bloode's. This one I always enjoy. "The vidphone company let me off the hook.' How was that? Or this
one: 'The highway construction truck tore up the street at forty miles an hour.' Or this: 'I am not in a
position to enjoy sexual relations.' Or—"
Shutting his ears, ignoring the prolix eye-eater, Rachmael examined the book, finding a page at
dead-random. The text swam, then set into clear focus for him.

A zygote formed between the indigenous in-habitants of Fomalhaut IX and Homo sapiens gives us
evidence of the dominant aspect of the so-called 'Mazdast' genetic inheritance. From the twin radically
opposing strains arises what nom-inally appears to be a pure 'Mazdast,' with the exceptional
reorganization of the organs of sight, the cephalopodic entity otherwise manifesting itself intact and in its
customary fashion.

"You mean," Rachmael said, glancing up from the book, stunned, "that when you say you're Matson
Glazer-Holliday you mean you're an offspring of his and a—"
"And of a female Mazdast," the eye-eater said calmly. "Read on, Mr. ben Applebaum. There's much
more there to interest you. You'll find that each of the paraworlds is explained; the structure of each is
dis-played so that the logic constituting each is clearly revealed. Look in the index. Select the paraworld
which most interests you."
He turned at once toParaworld Blue.
"And Freya Holm," the eye-eater said, as Rachmael leafed shakily through the volume for the cited page.
"You wish to find her; this is your primary motive for coming here to Fomalhaut IX. Possibly there's an
entry regarding Miss Holm; had you thought of that, sir?"
Huskily, with disbelief, Rachmael said, "You're kid-ding." It was impossible.
"Merely test out what I say. Look under Holm com-ma Freya."
He did so.



The index informed him that there existed two entries regarding Freya. One on page fifty. The second
further in, deep into the book: on page two-hundred-and-ten.
He chose the earlier one first.

Freya saw, then, into the grave and screamed; she ran and as she ran, struggled to get away she knew it
for what it was: a refined form of nerve gas that—and then her coherent thoughts ceased and she simply
ran.

"It details," the eye-eater informed him, "Miss Holm's actions on this side of the Telpor gate. Up to the
present. If you want to know what became of her, sim-ply read on. And," it added sourly, "what became
of me."
His hands shaking, Rachmael read on. He had now swiftly turned to the later citation on page
two-hundred-and-ten; before his eyes danced the black bug-like words, details of Freya's fate here at
Newcolonizedland. He held, read, understood what he had come for; this, as the eye-eater said,
contained what he wanted.

Facing the deformed entity which she had once known as the human 'wash psychiatrist Dr. Lupov,
Freya whispered ashenly, "So the trans-formation is arranged by means of your techni-ques and all of
those damned gadgets you use to keep people thinking along the exact lines you want. And I thought it
was a biological sport; I was so completely convinced." She shut her eyes in deep, overpowering fatigue.
And realized that this was the end; she would go the way of Mat, of Rachmael ben Applebaum, of

"What way?" Rachmael demanded, lifting his eyes from the page and confronting the creature before
him. "You mean become like you?" His body cringed; he retreated physically from even the notion of it,
let alone its presence here before him.
"All flesh must die," the eye-eater said, and giggled.
Almost unable to hold onto Dr. Bloode's volume, Rachmael once more turned to the index. This time he
selected the entry:
ben Applebaum, Rachmael
And again read on. Grimly.

To the sharp-featured, intent young man beside him, Lupov said, "I think we can consider Reconstruct
Method Three to be successful. At least in its initial phase."
Jaimé Weiss nodded. "I agree. And you have the alternate versions of the text available? As the other



per-sons are brought in?" He did not take his eyes from the vid screen; he missed nothing of the activity
that at slowed-velocity passed before the magnetic scanning-heads of the replay deck for his and Dr.
Lupov's scrutiny.
"Several are ready." It did not seem urgent to Lupov to have all alternates of the text which Rachmael
ben Applebaum now read available at the same time; after all . . . certain changes in the other versions
might be indicated, depending on which way ben Applebaum jumped. His reaction to this text—in
particular the part dealing with his own "death"—would come in any mo-ment, now.
On the small screen Rachmael ben Applebaum slowly closed the book, stood uncertainly, and then said
to the creature facing him, "So that's how I'm going to get knocked off. Like that. Just like that."
"More or less," the eye-eater answered, carelessly.
"It's a good job," Jaimé Weiss commented with ap-proval.
"Yes." Lupov nodded. "It will probably function satisfactorily with this ben Applebaum person,
any-how." But the girl, he thought. Miss Holm . . . so far it had failed with her.So far. But that did not
indicate for a certainty that it would continue to fail. She had put up a protracted expert struggle—but of
course she was a pro. And ben Applebaum was not. Like the pilot Dosker, Miss Holm knew her
business; it would not be easy—was not at this moment easy, in fact—to recon her mentality by means of
a variety of (as she had asserted in the pseudo-spurious text) "damned gadgets you use to keep people
thinking along the exact lines you want."
A good description of our instrumentalities, Lupov reflected. This Weiss person has ability. His
com-position, this initial variant of the so-called Dr. Bloode Text—masterful. A powerful weapon in this
final vast conflict.
Of most interest would be a later response to one of the versions of the text. The reaction by Theodoric
Ferry.
It was this that both Jaimé Weiss and Dr. Lupov looked toward.
And—it would not be long, now. Theodoric Ferry would soon be located where the text could be
presented to him. At this moment, Ferry loitered on Terra. But—
At six-thirty, three hours from now, Ferry would make a secret trip to Newcolonizedland, one of many;
like Sepp von Einem, he crossed back and forth at will.
This time, however, he would make a one-way crossing.
Theodoric Ferry would never return to Terra.
At least not sane.

14



In the darkness of gathering fright Freya Holm wandered, trying to escape insight, the awareness of
absolute nonbeing which the intricate weapon manned by the two veteran police of Lies Incorporated
had thrust onto her—how long ago? She could not tell; her time sense, in the face of the field emanating
from the weapon, had like so much else that constituted objective reality totally vanished.
At her waist a delicate detection meter clicked on, reg-istered a measured passage of high-frequency
current; she halted, and the gravity of this new configuration slapped her into abrupt alertness. The meter
had been built to record one sole sub-variety of electrical activity. The flux emanating from—
A functioning Telpor station.
She peered. And, gathering in the dense haze that oc-cluded her sight, she made out what normally
would have passed for—and beyond any doubt had been designed deliberately to pass for—a mediocre
construct: a peripatetic bathroom. It appeared to have landed nearby, undoubtedly to give aid and
comfort to some passerby; its gay, bright neon sign winked on and off invitingly, displaying the
relief-providing slogan:
UNCLE JOHN'S LI'L HUT-SUT
An ordinary sight. And yet, according to the meter at her belt, not a peripatetic bathroom at all but one
end of a von Einem entity, set down here at Newcolonizedland and working away full blast; the recorded
line-surge ap-peared to be maximum, not minimum. The station could not be more fully in operation.
Warily, she made her way toward it. Heavy gray haze, a diffuse mass of drifting airborne debris,
sur-rounded her as she entered Uncle John's Li'l Hut-Sut station, passed down the quaintly archaic
wrought-iron staircase and into the cool, dimly lit chamber marked LADIES.
"Five cents, please," a mechanical voice said pleas-antly.
In a reflexive gesture she handed the nonexistent at-tendant a dime; her change rolled down a slot to her
and she pocketed it with absolutely no interest. Because, ahead of her, two bald women sat in adjoining
stalls, conversing in deep, guttural German.
She drew her sidearm and said to them as she pointed the pistol at them, "Hände hock, bitte."
Instantly one of the two figures yanked at the handle nearest her—or more accurately his—right hand; a
roar of rushing water thundered up and lashed at Freya in a sonic torrent which shook her and caused
her vision to blur, to become disfigured; the two shapes wavered and blended, and she found it virtually
impossible to keep her weapon pointed at them.
"Fräulein,"a masculine voice said tautly,"gib uns augenblicklich dein—"
She fired.
One of the twin indistinct shapes atomized silently. But the alternate Telpor technician hopped,
floundered, to one side; he sprang to his feet and bolted off. She followed him with the barrel of her gun,
fired once more—and missed.The last shot I'm entitled to, she thought to herself wanly. I missed my
chance; I missed getting both of them. And now it's me.
A current of hot, lashing air burst at her from the automatic wet-hands dryer; she ducked, half-blinded,
attempted to fire her small weapon once more—and then, from behind her, something of steel, something



not alive but alert and active, closed around her middle. She gasped in fear as it swept her from her feet;
twist-ing, she managed a meager glimpse of it: grotesquely, it was the vanity-table assembly—or rather a
homotropic device cammed as a vanity table. Its legs, six of them, had fitted one into the next, like
old-fashioned curtain rods; the joint appendage had extended itself expertly, groped until it encountered
her, and then, without the need or assistance of life, had embraced her in a grip of crushing death.
The remaining Telpor technician ceased to duck and weave; he drew himself upright, irritably tossed
aside the female garments which he had worn, walked a few steps toward her to watch her destruction.
Face twitch-ing eagerly, he surveyed the rapid closure of the vanity-table defense system, oh-ing with
satisfaction, his thin, pinched face marred with sadistic delight—pleasure at a well-functioning instrument
of murder.
"Please," she gasped, as the appendage drew her back toward the crypto-vanity table, which now
dis-played a wide maw in which to engulf her; within it she would be converted to ergs: energy to power
the assembly for future use.
"Es tut mir furchtbar leid,"the Telpor technician said, licking his mildly hairy lips with near-erotic
delight, "aber—"
"Can't you do anything for me?" she managed to say, or rather made an attempt to say; no breath
remained in her, now, by which to speak. The end, she realized, was close by; it would not be long.
"Soschön, dock," the German intoned, his eyes fixed on her; crooning to himself, he approached closer
and closer, swaying in a hypnotic dance of physiological sympathy—physical but not emotional
correspondence, his body—but not his mentality—responding to what was rapidly happening to her as
the tapered extension of
the vanity table drew her back to engulf her.
No one, she realized. Nothing. Rachmael, she thought; why is it that—and then her thoughts dimmed.
Over. Done. She shut her eyes, and, with her fingers, groped for the destruct-trigger which would set off
a high-yield charge implanted subdermally; better to die by means of a merciful Lies Incorporated
Selbstmort in-strument placed within her body for her protection than by the cruel THL thing devouring
her piecemeal . . . as the final remnant of awareness departed from her, she touched the trigger—
"Oh no, miss," a reprimanding voice said, from a distance away. "Not in the presence of a guided tour."
Sounds, the near-presence of people—she opened her eyes, saw descending the stairs of the women's
room a gang of miscellaneous persons: men and women and children, all dressed well, all solemnly
scrutinizing her and the remaining Telpor technician, the vanity table with its metal arm engaged in
dragging her to her death . . . my god, she realized. I've seen this on TV, on trans-missions from Whale's
Mouth!
It can't be, Freya Holm said to herself. This is part of the ersatz reality superimposed for our benefit.
Years of this hoax—still?This is impossible!
Yet—here it was, before her eyes. Not on TV but in actuality.
The tour guide, with armband, in carefully pressed suit, continued to eye her reprovingly. Being killed
before the eyes of a guided tour; it's wrong, she real-ized. True; she agreed. You're absolutely correct.
Thinking that, she found herself sobbing hysterically; unable to cease she shut her eyes, took a deep,
unsteady breath.



"I am required to inform you, miss," the guide stated, his voice now wooden and correct, "that you are
under arrest. For causing a disturbance interfering with the orderly unfolding of an official, licensed White
House tour. I am also required to inform you that you are in custody as of this moment, without written
notice, and you are to be held without bail until a
Colony Municipal Court can, at a later date, deal with you." He eyed the Telpor technician coldly and
with massive suspicion. "Sir, you appear to be involved in this matter to some extent."
"In no way whatsoever," the Telpor technician said at once.
"Then," the guide said, as his herded group of sight-seers gawked, "how do you explain your
unauthorized presence here in the ladies' section of this Uncle John's Li'l Hut-sut station?"
The Telpor technician shrugged, flushing crimson.
"A Thingism," the guide said in an aside to Freya. "He flushes at his presence in a comfort station." He
sniggered, and the group of sightseers laughed to various degrees. "I hold this job," the guide informed
Freya as he expertly unfastened her from the manual ex-tension of the pseudo vanity table, "for good
reason; my wit delights the multitude."
The Telpor technician said sullenly, "Thingismtry is degenerate."
"Perhaps," the guide admitted. He steadied Freya as the vanity table reluctantly released her; in a
gentle-manly way he assisted her away from the feral device and over to his throng. "But it helps pass the
dull hours away; does it not?" He addressed his tame collection of sightseers.
They nodded obediently, the men eying Freya with in-terest; she saw, now, that her blouse had been
neatly shredded by the arm of the vanity table, and, with numb fingers, she gathered it about her.
"No need of that," the guide said softly in her ear. "A bit of exposed female bosom also helps pass the
dull hours." He grinned at her. "Hmm," he added, half to himself. "I wouldn't be surprised if President
Jones wanted to interview you personally. He takes a grave in-terest in matters of this sort, these civil
disturbances which upset the orderly—"
"Please just get me out of here," Freya said tightly.
"Of course." The guide led her to the stairs. Behind them, the Telpor technician was ignored. "But I don't
think you can avoid spending a few moments with the august President of Whale's Mouth, in view of—or
perhaps I should say because of—the anatomy which you reveal so—"
"President Omar Jones," Freya said, "does not exist."
"Oh?" The guide glanced at her mockingly. "Are you certain, miss? Are you truly ready to invite a little of
Dr. Lupov's S.A.T. to remedy a rather disordered lit-tle feminine mental imbalance? Eh?"
She groaned. And allowed the guide to escort her and the group of sightseers up the stairs, out of Uncle
John's Li'l Hut-sut comfort station and onto the surface of—Newcolonizedland.
"I'd like to have your complete, legal name, miss," the guide was murmuring to her; he now held a book
of forms in his left hand and a pen in his right. "Last name first, please. And if you have any I.D. on you



I'd be much obliged to see that, too. Ah, Miss Freya Holm." He glanced at her wallet, then at her face,
with a totally new expression. I wonder what that means, Freya won-dered.
She had an intuition that she would soon know.
And it would not be pleasant.

At the top of the stairs two agents of Trails of Hoff-man Limited met her and the guide, expertly relieved
the guide of his self-assumed responsibilities.
"We'll take her from here on in," the taller of the two THL agents explained curtly to the guide; he took
Freya by the shoulder and led her, with his companion, toward a parked official-looking oversize flapple.
The guide, perplexed, looking after them, murmured, "Gracious." And then returned to his customary
duties; he herded his group off in the other direction, circumspectly minding his own business; the
expression on his face showed all too well that he recognized that somehow he had strayed out of his
depth. His discom-fort at unexpectedly encountering the two THL agents seemed to Freya almost as
great as her own . . . and her awareness of the lethal aspect of THL grew with this recognition—in fact
burgeoned into overwhelming immensity.
Even here, on Fomalhaut IX—the power, the dull, metallic size of THL was matched by nothing else;
the great entity stood alone, without a real antagonist. And here the UN failed to manifest its own
authority. Or so, she reflected somberly, it would seem.
The contest between Horst Bertold and Theo Ferry seemed to have resolved itself before genuinely
getting underway; fundamentally it was no contest at all. And Theo Ferry, more than anyone else, knew
it.
Beyond any doubt.
"Your operations here," she told the two THL agents, "are absolutely illegal." And, having an-nounced
this, she felt the utter futility of mere words. How could an empty statement abolish THL, or for that
matter, even these two minor instruments of its author-ity? The futility of the struggle seemed to her, at
this instant, beyond compare; she felt her verve, her energy quotient, wither.
Meanwhile, the two THL agents led her rapidly toward their parked motor-on flapple.
When the flapple had achieved reasonable altitude, one of the THL agents produced a large hardbound
volume, examined it, then passed it to his companion, who, after an interval, then abruptly handed it to
Freya.
"What's this?" she demanded. "And where are we going?"
"You may be interested in this," the taller agent in-formed her. "I think you'll find it well worth your time.
Go ahead; open it."
With almost occult suspicion, Freya studied the cover. "An economic history of Newcolonizedland," she
said, with distaste. More of the propaganda, lurid and false, of the irreal president's regnancy, she
real-ized, and started to hand it back. The agent, however, refused to accept the book; he shook his



head curtly. And so, with reluctance, she opened to the back, glanced with distaste over the index.
And saw her own name.
"That's right," the tall THL agent said with a smirk. "You're in it, Miss Holm. So's that fathead, ben
Applebaum."
She turned pages and saw that it was so. Will this tell me, she wondered, what's happened to
Rachmael? Finding the page reference, she at once turned to it. Her hands shook as she read the startling
passage.

"What way?" Rachmael demanded, lifting his eyes from the page and confronting the creature before
him. "You mean become like you?" His body cringed; he retreated physically from even the notion of it,
let alone its presence here before him.

"Good lord," Freya said. And read intently on.

"All flesh must die." the eye-eater said, and giggled.

Aloud, Freya said, " 'The eye-eater.' " Chilled, she said to the two

See Note on page V

"Let me go," she choked; her fingers, torn from the trigger, dug into their clutching hands. I couldn't do it,
she realized; I couldn't activate the darn mechanism. Weariness filled her as she felt their hands rip loose
the destruct mechanism, tear it apart, then drop it into the waste slot of the flapple.
"It would have destroyed all of us," the taller agent gasped as he and his companion confronted her
ac-cusingly, with indignation mixed with apprehension; she had genuinely frightened them by her
near-suicide. As far as they knew, it had been close, very close. But actually she could not have done it
at all.
The man's companion muttered, "We better consult the book. See what it says; assuming of course it
says anything." Together the two of them pored over the book, ignoring her; Freya, with trembling
fingers, lit a cigarette, stared sightlessly through the window at the ground below.



Trees . . . houses. Exactly as the TV screen had promised. Jolted, she thought, Where's the garrison
state? Where's the war I saw? The battle I was a part of, only a little while ago?
It made no sense.
"We were fighting," she said at last.
Startled, the THL agents glanced at her, then at one another. "She must have gotten into one of the
paraworlds," one said presently to his companion; they both nodded in attentive agreement. "Silver?
White? I forget which Lupov calls it. Not The Clock, though."
"And not Blue," the other agent murmured. Again the two of them returned to the large hardbound book;
again they ignored her.
Strange, Freya thought. It made no sense. And yet the two THL agents appeared to understand. Will I
ever know? she asked herself. And if so,will it be in time?
Several worlds, she realized. And each of them dif-ferent. And—if they're looking in that book, not to
see what has happened but to see what will happen . . . then it must have something to do with time.
Time-travel. The UN's time-warpage weapon.
Evidently Sepp von Einem had gotten hold of it. The senile old genius and his disturbed proleptic protégé
Gloch had altered it, god only knew how. But effec-tively; that much was obvious.
The flapple began to descend.
Glancing, she saw below them a large ship moored by its tail, in flight position, poised to ascend at any
moment; in fact, wisps of fuel-vapor trickled from its rear. A big one, she decided; it belonged to
someone of importance. Possibly President Omar Jones. Or—
Or worse.
She had a good idea that it wasnot Omar Jones' ship—even if such a person existed. Undoubtedly the
ship belonged to Theo Ferry. And, as she watched the ship grow, a bizarre idea occurred to her. What if
theOmphalos had been beaten, years ago, in its flight from the Sol system to Fomalhaut? This ship, huge
and menacing, with its pitted gray hull . . . certainly it did have the sullied, darkened appearance of a
much-utilized vessel; had it, at some earlier time, crossed deep space between the two star systems?
The ultimate irony. Theo Ferry had made the journey before Rachmael ben Applebaum. Or rather
possibly had; she could of course not be sure. But she felt in-tuitively that Ferry had, all this time, been
capable of doing it. So whatever could be learned had long ago—perhaps decades ago—been learned .
. . and by the very man whom they had, at all costs, to defeat.
"Better brush your hair," the taller of the two THL agents announced to her; he then winked—lewdly, it
seemed to her—to his companion. "I'm giving you fair warning; you're going to have an important visitor
here in your room in a few minutes."
Almost unable to speak, Freya said, "This isn't my room!"



"Bedroom?" Both THL agents laughed in unison, and this time there was no mistaking it; the tone was
one of rancid, enormous licentiousness. And, clearly, this appeared to the two men an old story; they
both knew precisely what would be happening—not to them but for them to witness; she was overtly
conscious of the mood already in progress. They knew what would soon be expected of them . . . and of
her. And yet it did not seem to her so much concerned with Theo Ferry as it did with the environment
here as a whole; she sensed an un-derlyingwrongness, and sensed further that in some way which she
did not comprehend, Ferry was as much a victim of it as she.
Paraworlds, she thought to herself. They, the two THL agents, had said that. Silver, White, The Clock .
. . and finally Blue.
Am I in a paraworld now? she wondered. Whatever they are. Perhaps that would explain the twisted,
strained wrongness which the world around her now seemed to possess throughout. She shivered. Which
one is this? she asked herself, assuming it's any of them? But even if it is, she realized, that still doesn't tell
me what they are, or how I got into this one, or—how I manage to scramble back. Again she shivered.
"We'll be touching ships with Mr. Ferry at 003.5," the taller of the two THL agents informed her
con-ventionally; he seemed amused, now, as if her discom-fort were quaint and charming. "So be
prepared," he added. "Last chance to—"
"May I see that book again?" she blurted. "The one you have there; the book about me and Rachmael."
The taller of the two agents passed her the volume; at once she turned to the index and sought out her
own name. Two citations in the first part of the book; three later on. She selected the next to last one, on
page two-ninety-eight; a moment later she had begun rapidly to read.

No doubt could exist in her mind, now; it had been abundantly demonstrated. With renewed courage
Freya faced Theodoric Ferry, the most powerful man in either the Sol or the Fomalhaut system and
perhaps even beyond, and said,
"I'm sorry, Mr. Ferry." Her voice, in her own ears, was cool, as calm as she might have hoped for. "I
failed to realize what you are. You'll have to excuse my hysteria on that basis." With a slight—but
unnoticed tremor—she adjusted the right strap of her half-bra, drawing it back up onto her smooth, bare,
slightly tanned shoulder. "I now—"
"Yes, Miss Holm?" Ferry's tone was dark, mocking. "Exactly what do you realize about me, now? Say
it." He chuckled.
Freya said, "You're an aquatic cephalopod, a Mazdast. And you've always been. A long time ago,
when Telpor first linked the Sol system with the Fomalhaut system, when the first Terran field-team
crossed overand returned— "
"That's correct," Theodoric Ferry agreed, and once more chuckled . . . although now his—or rather
its—tone consisted of a wet, wailing hiss. "I infiltrated your race decades ago. I've been in your midst

"Better get the book back from her again," the smaller of the two THL agents said warningly to his
companion. "I still think she's reading too damn much." He then, without further consultation, snatched the



book back from her numbed hands, this time put it away in a locked briefcase which, after an in-decisive
pause he then laboriously chained to his wrist—just in case.
"Yes," the other agent agreed absently; he had become completely involved in landing the flapple on the
flattened roof-indentation of Theo Ferry's huge ship. "She probably read too much. But—" He spun the
unusually elaborate controls. "—it doesn't much matter, at this point; I fail to see what effective
dif-ference it makes." From beneath them a low scraping noise sounded; the flapple jiggled.
They had landed.
Doesn't it matter? she thought, dazed. That Theo Ferry is another life form entirely, not human at all?
That has invaded our System a long time back?Don't you two men care?
Did you know it all this time?
Our enemy, she realized, is far more ominous than any of us had at any time glimpsed. Ironic, she
thought; one of the sales pitches they gave us—THL gave us—was the need to fight with and subdue the
hostile native life forms of the Fomalhaut system . . . and it turns out to be true after all, true in the most
awful sense. I wonder, she thought, how many of THL's employees know it? I wonder—
She thought, I wonder how many more of these monsters exist on Terra. Imitating human life forms. Is
Theodoric Ferry the only one? Probably not; probably most of THL is staffed by them, including Sepp
von Einem.
The ability to mingle with human beings, to appear like them . . . undoubtedly it's due to a device
com-pounded either by von Einem or that hideous thing who works with him, that Greg Gloch.
Of all of them, she thought, none is really less human than Gloch.
The door of the flapple swung open; the two THL agents at once stood at attention. Reluctantly, she
turned her unwilling eyes toward the now fully open door.
In the entrance way stood Theodoric Ferry.
She screamed.
"I beg your pardon," Ferry said, and lifted an eye-brow archly. He turned questioningly to the two THL
agents. "What's the matter with Miss Holm? She seems out of control."
"Sorry, Mr. Ferry," the taller of the two agents said briskly. "I would guess that she's not well; she
appears to have hallucinated one or more of what is called 'paraworlds.' On her arrival here she
experienced the particular delusional world dealing with the garrison state . . . although now, from what
she's told us, that delusion seems to have evaporated."
"But something," Ferry said with a frown, "has replaced it. Perhaps an alternate paraworld . . . possibly
even a more severe one. Well, Miss Holm has turned out as predicted." He chuckled, walked several
cautious steps toward Freya, who stood frozen and trembling, unable even to retreat. "As with her
paramour, Rach-mael von Applebaum—"
"Ben," the taller of the two THL agents corrected tactfully.



"Ah yes." Ferry nodded amiably. "I am more ac-customed to the prefix designating a high-born German
than the rather—" He grimaced offensively. "—low-class name-structure employed by, ah, individuals of
Mr. Applebaum's shall I saytype." He grimaced dis-tastefully, then once more moved toward Freya
Holm.
They didn't search me, she said to herself. A spasm of fierceness filled her as she realized that—realized,
too, its meaning. Within the tied tails of superior fabric caught in a bun at her midsection lay a tiny but
effective self-defense instrument, provided by the wep-x people at Lies Incorporated. Now, if ever, the
time had come to employ it. True, it had a limited range; only one person could be taken out by it, and if
she moved to take out Theo Ferry both of the THL agents—armed and furious—would remain. She
could readily picture the following moments, once she had managed to wound or destroy Ferry. But—it
appeared well worth it. Even if she had not learned of Ferry's actual physiological origin . . .
Her fingers touched the bun of cloth at her midriff; an instant later she had found the safety of the
weapon, had switched it to off.
"Drot," Ferry said, regarding her uneasily.
" 'Drat,' sir," the taller of the two agents corrected him, as if routinely accustomed to doing so. " 'Drat' is
the Terran ejaculative term of dismay, if I may call your attention at a time like this to something so trivial.
Still, we all know how important it is—how vital you rightly feel it to be—to maintain strict verisimilitude
and ac-curacy in your speech patterns."
"Thank you, Frank," Theo Ferry agreed; he did not take his eyes from Freya. "Was this woman
searched?"
"Well, sir," the THL agent named Frank said un-comfortably, "we had in mind your overweening desire
to obtain a female of this—"
"Blurb!" Theodoric Ferry quivered in agitation. "She has on her some variety of—"
"Sorry, sir," the agent named Frank broke in with utter tact. "The term of immediate and dismayed
con-cern which you're reaching for is the word 'blast.' The term you've employed, 'blurb,' deals with a
sensational ad for some form of entertainment; generally a notice on a book cover or flap as to—"
All at once Freya became aware, shockingly, of the meaning of the THL agent's remarks; everything
which she suspected, everything which she had read in Dr. Bloode's book, now had been validated.
Theodoric Ferry had to be reminded, constantly, of the most commonplace Terran linguistic patterns. Of
course; these patterns were to him a totally alien struc-ture. So it was true. And, because of what had up
to this instant seemed an absurd, pointless exchange of remarks, no doubt could exist in her mind, now; it
had been abundantly demonstrated. With renewed courage Freya faced Theodoric Ferry, the most
powerful man in either the Sol or the Fomalhaut system and perhaps even beyond, and said,
"I'm sorry, Mr. Ferry." Her voice, in her own ears, was cool, as calm as she might have hoped for. "I
failed to realize what you are. You'll have to excuse my hys-teria on that basis." With a slight—but
unnoticed tremor—she adjusted the right strap of her half-bra, drawing it back up onto her smooth, bare,
slightly tanned shoulder. "I now—"
"Yes, Miss Holm?" Ferry's tone was dark, mocking. "Exactly what do you realize about me, now? Say
it." He chuckled.



Freya said, "You're an aquatic cephalopod, a Maz-dast. And you've always been. A long time ago,
when Telpor first linked the Sol system with the Fomalhaut system, when the first Terran field-team
crossed overand returned— "
"That's correct," Theodoric Ferry agreed, and once more chuckled . . . although now his—or rather
its—tone consisted of a wet, wailing hiss. "I infiltrated your race decades ago. I've been in your midst
before Lies In-corporated was founded; I've been with your people before you, Miss Holm, were even
born." Studying her intently he smiled; his eyes shone bleakly, and then, to her horror, the eyes began to
migrate. Faster and faster they moved toward the center of the forehead; there they joined, fused,
became one vast compound eye whose many lenses reflected her own image back at her, as in a
thousand warped black mirrors, again and again.
Within the bun of cloth slightly beneath her ribcase, Freya Holm compressed the activating assembly of
the defense-gun.
"Shloonk," Theodoric Ferry wheezed. His single eye rattled and spun as his body rocked back and
forth; then, without warning, the great dark orb popped from his bulging forehead and hung dangling from
a spring of steel. At the same time his entire head burst; screaming, Freya ducked as bits of gears, rods,
wiring, components of power systems, cogs, amplifying surge-gates, all failing to remain within the
shattered structure bounced here and there in the flapple. The two THL agents ducked, grunted and then
retreated as the rain of hot, destroyed metal pieces condensed about them both. She, too, reflexively
drew back; staring, she saw a main-shaft and an intricate cog mechanism . . . like a clock, she thought
dazedly. He'snot a deformed, nonTerran water-creature; he's a mechanical assembly—I don't
un-derstand. She shut her eyes, moaned in despair; the flapple, now, had faded momentarily into
obscurity, so intense was the hailstorm of metal and plastic parts from the bursting entity which had posed
as Theodoric Ferry just a moment before—had posed, more accu-rately, as an aquatic horror
masqueradingas Theodoric Ferry.
"One of those damn simulacrums," the THL agent who was not Frank said in disgust.
" 'Simulacra,' " Frank corrected, his teeth grinding in outrage as a major transformer from the
power-supply struck him on the temple and sent him flailing backward, off-balance; he fell against the
wall of the flapple, groaned and then slid to a sitting position, where he remained, his eyes empty. The
other THL agent, arms windmilling, fought his way through the still-exploding debris of the simulacrum
toward Freya; his fingers groped for her ineffectually—and then he gave up, abandoned whatever he had
had in his mind; turning, he hunched forward, lurched blindly off, in the general direction of the entrance
hatch of the flapple. And then, with a clatter, disappeared. She remained with the disintegrating
simulacrum and the unconscious THL agent Frank; the only sound was the metallic thump of components
as they continued to pelt against the walls and floor of the flapple.
Good lord, she thought indistinctly, her mind in a state of almost deranged confusion. That book they
showed me—it was wrong!Or else I failed to read far enough . . .
Desperately, she searched about in the rubbish-heaped flapple for the book; then all at once she
remem-bered what had happened to it. The smaller THL agent had escaped with it locked in a briefcase
chained to his wrist; the book had, so to speak, departed with him—in any case, both the agent and the
volume were gone, now. So she would never know what had come next in the printed text; had it
corrected its own evident misper-ception, as she had hers? Or—did the text of Dr. Bloode's book
continue on, manfully declaring that Theodoric Ferry was an aquatic—what was the term it—and
she—had used? Mazdast; that was it. She won-dered, now, precisely what it meant; until she had read



the word in the text she had never before encountered it. But there was something else. Something at the
rim of consciousness, crowding forward, attempting to enter her mind; it could not be thrust back, odious
as it was.
The Clock. That term, referring to one of the so-called paraworlds. Had this been—The Clock? And if
so—
Then the original encounter between the black space-pilot, Rachmael ben Applebaum, and the sim of
Theo-doric Ferry—that, back in the Sol system, had been a manifestation—not of a Ferry-simulacrum at
all—but, like this, of the paraworld called The Clock.
The delusional worlds somehow active here at Whale's Mouth had already spread to and penetrated
Terra. It had already been experienced—experienced, yes; but not recognized.
She shuddered.

15

For more than thirty minutes nothing had ema-nated from the anti-prolepsis chamber of Gregory Gloch,
and by now Sepp von Einem realized with full acuity that something dreadful had gone wrong.
Taking a calculated risk—Gloch in the past had ranted against this as an illegal invasion of his privacy, of
his very psyche, in fact—Dr. von Einem clicked toon the audio monitoring mechanism which tapped the
in-put circuit of the chamber. Shortly, he found himself receiving via a three-inch speaker mounted on the
wall the same signals which passed to his protégé.
The first rush of impulses almost unhinged him.
"Pun, there," a jovial masculine—somewhat elderly voice—was in the process of intoning. "Life of you,
life lived over . . . see?" It then chuckled loudly in a comical but distinctly vulgar fashion. "Heh-heh," it
gloated. "How you doin', ol' boy, Gloch there, ol' fella?"
"Fine," Greg Gloch's retort came. But to von Einem it had a very distinctive weak quality about it, a vivid
loss of surgency which chilled him deeply, caused him to hang on each following word of the exchange.
Who was this person addressing Gloch? he asked himself. And got no response; the voice was new to
him. And yet—
At the same time it acutely resembled a voice he knew. A voice he could however not identify, to save
his life. He had the intuition, then, that this voice had deliberately been disguised; he would need a video
breakdown by which to identify it. And that would take time, precious time which no one, at this moment
in the struggle over Whale's Mouth, could afford to spare—least of all he.
Pressing a command key, von Einem said, "Emer-gency call. I want an immediate trace put on the audio
signal reaching Herr Gloch. Notify me of the origin-point, then if you must, obtain a video pic of the
voice-pattern and inform me of the caller's identity." He paused, pondering; it was, to say the least, a
decision of gravity which he now entertained. "Once you have the locus detailed," he said slowly, "run a
homotropic foil along the line. We can obtain the voice-ident after-wards."



The microscopic feedback circuit within his ear spluttered, "Herr Doktor—you mean take out the caller
before identification?Das ist gar unmöglich—gar!"
Von Einem rasped, "It is distinctly not out of the question; in fact it is essential." For, underneath, he had
an intuition as to who the disguised voice consisted of. It could only be one person.
Jaimé Weiss. Theenfant terrible of the UN, prob-ably operating in conjunction with his brother-in-law,
the 'wash psychiatrist Lupov. Thinking that, von Einem felt nausea rise like a gray tide within him. Them,
he reflected bitingly; the worst pair extant. Probably in orbit in a sealed sat at Whale's Mouth . . .
transmitting either at faster-than-light directly to our system or worse still: feeding their lines during routine
traffic through one of our own Telpor stations.
Savagely, he said to the technician brought into con-tact by means of the command key at his disposal,
"There is an exceedingly meager latitude for the per-formance of successful action against this party,
Mein Herr; or don't you believe me? You suppose I am mistaken? Iknow who has infiltrated the
anti-prolepsis tank of poor Herr Gloch;mach' snell !"And you had damn well better be successful, he
said to himself as he released his command key and walked moodily to the chamber to look directly at
his protégé to discern Gloch's difficulty with his own eyes.
I wonder, he thought to himself as he watched the youth's face twist with discomfort, if I shouldn't
obli-terate the alien audio signal that's so successfully jam-ming the orderly process within the chamber.
Or at least reroute it so that I receive it but Gloch does not.
However, it appeared to von Einem that the interlop-ing audio transmission had already done its job;
Greg Gloch's face was a mass of confusion and turbulence. Whatever ideas Gloch had entertained for a
counter-weapon against Bertold had long since evaporated.Zum Teufel, von Einem said to himself in a
near-frenzied spasm of disappointment—as well as an ever-expanding sense that theAugenblick, the
essential instant, had somehow managed to elude him. Somehow? Again he listened to the disruptive
voice plaguing Gregory Gloch. Here it was; this was the malefactionary disturbance. This: Jaimé Weiss
himself, wherever in the galaxy he had now located himself and his fawning sycophantic retinue.
Can Gloch hear me now? he wondered. Can he hear anything beyond that damned voice?
As an experiment, he cautiously addressed Gloch—by means of the customary time-rephasing
constructs built into the chamber. "Greg!Kannst hör'?" He listened, waited; after a time he heard his
words reeled off to the man within the chamber at appropriate velocity. Then the lips of the man moved,
and then, to his relief, a sentence by Gloch was spewed out by the transmitter of the chamber.
"Oh. Yes, Herr von Einem." The voice had a vague quality about it, a preoccupation; Greg Gloch heard,
but did not really seem able to focus his faculties. "I was . . . um . . . daydreaming or . . . some darn thing.
Ummp!" Gloch noisily cleared his throat. "What, ah, can I, eh, do for you, sir? Um?"
"Who's that constantly addressing you, Greg? That irritating voice which impedes every attempt you
make to perform your assigned tasks?"
"Oh. Well. I believe—" For almost an entire minute Gloch remained silent; then, at last, like a rewound
toy, he managed to continue. "Seems to me he identified himself as Charley Falks' little boy Martha. Yes;
I'm certain of it. Ol' Charley Falks' little boy—"
"Das kann nicht sein,"von Einem snarled. "It simply can't be! No one's little boy is named Martha;das



weis' Ich ja. "He lapsed into brooding, introverted contemplation, then. A conspiracy, he decided. And
one that's working. Our only recourse is the homotropic weapon released to follow the carrier wave of
this deceptive transmission back to its source; I hope it is already in motion.
Grimly, he strode back to the command key, punched it down.
"Yes, Herr Doktor."
"The homotropic foil; has it—"
"On its way, sir," the technician informed him brightly. "As you instructed: released before ident." The
technician added in a half-aside, "I do hope, sir, that it's not someone you have positive inclinations
toward."
"It can't be," von Einem said, and released the key with an abiding sense of satisfaction. But then an
alter-nate—and not so pleasing—thought came to him. The homotropic foil, until it reached its target,
could act as a dead giveaway regarding itsown origin. If the proper monitoring equipment were put in
use—or already had been put in functioning condition—then the foil would accomplish a handy, quick
task for the enemy: it would tell him—or both of them—where the disruptive signal entitling itself "ol'
Charley Falks' little boy Martha" et cetera had gone . . . gone and accomplished vast damage in respect
to von Einem and THL in general.
I wish Herr Ferry were immediately here, von Einem growled to himself gloomily; he picked at a
poison-impregnated false tooth mounted in his upper left molars, wondering if the time might come when
he would be required by obtaining conditions to do away with himself.
But Theodoric Ferry busied himself at this moment preparing for a long-projected trip via Telpor to
Whale's Mouth. A most important journey, too, inas-much as there he would complete the formulation of
contemplated final schemes: this was the moment in which the vise of history would clamp shut on the
unmen such as Rachmael ben Applebaum and his doxie Miss Holm—not to mention Herr
Glazer-Holliday who might in fact well already be now dead . . . or however it was phrased.
"There," von Einem mused, "is a no-good individ-ual, that Matson person, that slobbering hyphenater."
His disgust—and satisfaction at either the already-accomplished or proposed taking-out of
Glazer-Hol-liday—knew no limit; both emotions expanded like a warm, unclouded sun.
On the other hand, what if Weiss and Lupov man-aged to obtain the reverse trace on the homotropic
foil now dispatched them-wards? An unease-manufacturing thought, and one which he still did not enjoy.
Nor would he until the manifold success of the foil had been proclaimed.
He could do nothing but wait. And meanwhile, hope that Herr Ferry's journey to Whale's Mouth would
ac-complish all that it entertained. Because the import of that sally remained uncommonly vast—to say
the least.
In his ear the monitor covering aud transmissions entering Gloch's anti-prolepsis tank whined, "Say, you
know? An interesting sort of game showed up among us kids the other day; might interest you.
Thingisms, it's called. Ever hear of it?"
"No," Gloch answered, briefly; his retort, too, reached the listening Herr von Einem.
"Works like this. I'll give you this example; then maybe you can think up a few of your own. Get this:



'The hopes of the woolen industry are threadbare.' Haw haw haw! You get it? Woolen,
threadbare—see?"
"Umm," Gloch said irritably.
"And now, little ol' Greg," the voice intoned, "how 'bout a Thingism from you'all? Eh?"
"Keerist," Gloch protested, and then was silent. Ob-viously he had directed his thoughts along the
requested direction.
This must stop, von Einem realized. And soon.
Or Theo Ferry's trip to Whale's Mouth is in jeopardy.
But why—he did not know; it was an unconscious in-sight, nothing more. As yet. Even so, however, he
ap-preciated its certitude: beyond any doubt his appraisal of the danger surging over them all was
accurate.

To the exceedingly well-groomed young receptionist wearing the topless formal dress, a gaggle of dark
red Star of Holland roses entwined in her heavy, attractive blonde hair, Theodoric Ferry said brusquely,
"You know who I am, miss. Also, you know that by UN law this Telpor station is inoperative; however,
we know better, do we not?" He kept his eyes fixed on her; nothing could be permitted to go wrong.
Not at this late date, with each side fully committed to the fracas on the far side of the teleportation gates.
Neither he nor the UN had much left to offer; he was aware of this, and he hoped that his analysis of the
UN's resources was not inadequate.
Anyhow—no other direction lay ahead except that of continuation of this, his original program. He could
scarcely withdraw now; it would be an immediate un-doing of everything so far accomplished.
"Yes Mr. Ferry," the attractive, full-breasted—with enlarged gaily-lit pasties—young woman responded.
"But to my knowledge there's no cause for alarm. Why don't you seat yourself and allow the
sim-attendant to pour you a warm cup of catnip tea?"
"Thank you," Ferry said, and made his way to a soft, comfortable style of sofa at the far end of the
station's waiting room.
As he sipped the invigorating tea (actually a Martian import with stimulant properties, not to mention
aphrodisiac) Theo Ferry unwillingly made out the com-plex series of required forms, wondering sullenly
to himself why it was that he, even he!, had to do so . . . af-ter all, he owned the entire plant, lock, stock
et al. Nevertheless he followed protocol; possibly it had a pur-pose, and in any case he would be
traveling, as usual, under a code name—he had been called "Mr. Ferry" for the last time. Anyhow for a
while.
"Your shots, Mr. Hennen." A THL nurse, middle-aged and severe, stood nearby with ugly needles
poised. "Kindly remove your outer garments, please. And put away that cup of insipid catnip tea."
Obviously she did not recognize him; she, a typical bureaucrat, had become engrossed in the cover
projected by the filled-out forms. He felt amiable, realizing this. A good omen, he said to himself.



Presently he lay unclothed, feeling conspicuous, now, while three owlish Telpor technicians puttered
about.
"Mr. Mike Hennen, Herr," one of the technicians in-formed him with a heavy German accent, "please if
you will reduce your gaze not to notice the hostile field-emanations; there is a severe retinal risk.
Understand?"
"Yes, yes," he answered angrily.
The ram-head of energy that tore him into shreds obliterated any sense of indignation that he might have
felt at being treated as one more common mortal; back and forth it surged, making him shrill with pain—it
could not be called attractive, the process of telepor-tation; he gritted his teeth, cursed, spat, waited for
the field to diminish . . . and hated each moment that the force held him. Hardly worth it, he said to
himself in a mixture of suffering and outrage. And then—
The terminal surge dwindled and he succeeded in opening his left eye. He blinked. Strained to see.
All three Telpor technicians had vanished. He lay now in a vastly smaller chamber. A pretty girl, wearing
a pale blue transparent smock, busied herself strolling back and forth past the entrance-doorway, a
hulking hand-weapon at ready. Patrolling in case of UN seizure or attempted seizure, he understood.
And sat up, grunt-ing.
"Good morning!" the girl said blithely, glancing at him with an expression of amusement. "Your clothing,
Mr. Hennen, can be found in one of our little metal baskets; in your case, marked 136552. Now, if you
should by any chance find yourself becoming un-steady—"
"Okay," he said roughly. "Help me to my goddam feet."
A moment later, in a side alcove, he had dressed; he gathered together his portable possessions,
examined his reflection in a rather dim-with-dust mirror, then strolled out, feeling much better, to confront
the prowling girl in the lacy smock.
"What's a good hotel?" he demanded—as if he did not know. But the pose of being an ordinary
neo-colonist had to be maintained, even toward this loyal employee.
"The Simpy Cat," the girl answered; she now studied him intently. "I think I've seen you before," she
de-cided. "Mr. Hennen. Hmm. No, the name is new to me. An odd name; is it Irish?"
"Who knows," he muttered as he strode toward the door. No time for chitchat, not even with a girl so
pretty. Another time, perhaps . . .
"Watch out for Lies Incorporated police, Mr. Hen-nen!" the girl called after him. "They're everywhere.
And the fighting—it's really getting awful. Are you armed?"
"No." He paused reluctantly at the door. More de-tails.
"THL," the girl informed him, "would be glad to sell you a small but highly useful weapon which—"
"Nuts to that," Ferry said, and plunged on outdoors, onto the dark sidewalk.
Shapes, colorless, vast and swift-moving, sailed in every layer of this world. Rooted, he gaped at the



new ghastly transformation of the colony which he knew so well. The war; he remembered, then, with a
jolt. Well, so it would be for a while. But, startled, he had dif-ficulty once more orienting himself. Good
god, how long wouldthis last? He walked a few steps, still at-tempting to adjust, still finding it impossible;
he seemed to sway in an alien sea, a life unanticipated by the en-vironment; he was as strange to it as it to
him.
"Yes sir!" a mechanical voice said. "Reading mate-rial to banish boredom. Newspaper or paperback
book, sir?" The robot 'pape-vender coasted eagerly in his direction; with dismay he observed that its
metal body had become corroded and pitted from the discharge of nearby anti-personnel weapons' fire.
"No," he said rapidly. "This damn war, here—"
"The latest 'pape will explain it entirely, sir," the vendor said in a loud braying voice as it pursued him; he
peered about hopefully for a flapple-for-hire, saw none, felt keen nervousness: out here on the pavement
he re-mained singularly exposed.
And in my own damn colony planet's own main hub, he said to himself with aggrieved indignation. Can't
walk my own streets with impunity; have to put on a cammed identity—make it appear I'm some nitwit
nonentity named Mike Hennen or whatever . . . he had already virtually lost contact with his false identity,
by now, and the loss frankly pleased him. Damn it, he said to himself, I'm the one and only—
At that moment he caught sight of the single main item which the 'pape vendor had to offer.The True
and Complete Economic and Political History of Newcol-onizedland, he read. By who? Dr. Bloode.
Strange, he thought. I haven't run across that before, and yet I'm in and out of this place all the time.
"I perceive your scrutiny of this remarkable text which I have for sale," the vendor declared. "This
edition, the eighteenth, is exceptionally up-to-date, sir; possibly you'd like to glance through it. No charge
for that." It whipped its copy of the huge book in his direc-tion; reflexively, he accepted it, opened it at
random, feeling restless and set-upon but not knowing precisely how to escape the 'pape vendor.
And, before his eyes, a passage dealing with him; his own name leaped up to stun him, to hold and
transmute his faculties of attention.
"You, too," the 'pape vendor announced, "can play a vital role in the development of this fine virgin
colo-nial world with its near-infinite promise of cultural and spiritual reward. In fact it is a distinct
possibility that you are already mentioned; why not consult the index and thereby scout out your own
name? Take a chance, Mr.—"
"Hennen," he murmured. "Or Hendren; whichever it is." Automatically obeying the firm promptings of the
vendor he turned to the index, glanced up and down the H's, then realized with a start that he had already
been doing exactly that: reading about himself, but un-der his real name. With a grunt of irritation he
swept the useless pages aside, sought his actual, correct name in the index.
After the entry Ferry, Theodoric, he found virtually unending citations; the page he had formerly been
reading consisted of but one out of many.
On impulse he chose the first entry, that with the lowest page number.

Early in the morning Theodoric Ferry, chief of the vast economic and political entity Trails of Hoff-man



Limited, got out of bed, put on his clothes and walked into the living room.

Damned dull stuff, he decided in bewilderment. Is this book full ofeverything about me? Even the most
trivial details? For some strange and obscure reason, this rubbed him the wrong way; once more he
sought the index and this time selected a much later entry.

That early evening when Theo Ferry entered the Telpor station under the false code-ident, that of one
Mike Hennen, he little glimpsed the fateful events which would in only a short time transpire in his already
baroque and twisted

"For godsake," he complained hoarsely. They al-ready knew; already had hold of his cover name—in
fact had had time to print it up and run off this weird book concerning him. Slander! "Listen," he said
se-verely to the alert 'pape vendor, "my private life is my own business; there's no valid reason in the
galaxy why my doings should be listed here." I ought to bust this outfit, he decided. Whoever these
people are who put together this miserable book. Eighteenth edition? Good lord, he realized; it must have
been kicking around for one hell of a long time . . . but maybe lacking some of these entries about me. In
fact it would have to lack this entry if for no other reason than that I just within the last day or so hit on
my name-cover.
"One poscred, sir," the vendor said politely. "And the book becomes yours to keep."
Gruffly, he handed over the money; the vendor, pleased, wheeled off into the clouds of debris created
by the warfare taking place a few blocks off. The book carefully gripped, Theo Ferry sprinted
sure-footedly for the security of a nearby semi-ruined housing structure; there, crouched down among the
fragmented blocks of building-plastic, he once more resumed his intent reading. Fully absorbed in the
peculiar text he became totally oblivious to the noises and movements around him; all that existed for him
now was the printed page held motionless before his intense scrutiny.
I'm damn near the main character in this tract, he realized. Myself, Matson, that Rachmael ben
Apple-baum, this girl named Freya something and of course Lupov—naturally Lupov. On impulse he
looked up a citation regarding Dr. Lupov; a moment later he found himself engrossed in that particular
section of the text, even though admittedly it did not deal with himself at all.

Peering tautly into the small vid screen, Dr. Lupov said to the sharp-featured young man beside him,
"Now is the time, Jaimé. Either Theo Ferry examines the Bloode text or else he never does. If he turns to
page one-forty-nine, then we have a real chance of—"
"He won't," Jaimé Weiss said fatalistically. "The chances are against it. In my opinion he must somehow
be maneuvered very clearly and directly into turning to that one particular page; somehow an instrument
or method must be em-ployed which will first of all provide him with that page number out of all possible
page numbers, and, when that's done, somehow his curiosity must



Hands shaking, Theo Ferry leafed through the book to page one hundred and forty-nine. And,
compul-sively, unblinkingly, studied the text before him.

With a snort of exultation, Jaimé Weiss said, "He did it.Dr. Lupov—I was absolutely right." Gleefully, he
slapped at the series of meters, switches and dials before the two of them. But of course the ploy had
succeeded because of the 'wash psychiatrist's accurate diagnosis of all the passive factors constellating in
Theo Ferry's psyche. Inability to resist danger . . . the suggestion that it constituted a hazard, his turning to
that one page: the very notion that an extreme risk was involved had caused Ferry to thumb frantically in
that direction.
He had gone unresistingly to that page—and he would not be coming back out.
"Sir," one of Lupov's assistants said suddenly, star-tling both Weiss and the psychiatrist, "we've just
picked up something deadly on the scope. A detonation-foil tropic to both of you has passed through the
Telpor gate that we made use of to reach Greg Gloch in his cham-ber." The man's face shone pale and
damp with fright.
Jaimé Weiss and Dr. Lupov looked at each other wordlessly.
"I would say," Lupov said presently, his voice shaking, "that everything now depends on how rapidly the
foil moves, how accurate it is, and—" He gestured convulsively at the micro-screen before them. "—and
how long it takes Mr. Ferry to succumb to the 'wash in-structions on the page."
"How long," Jaimé said carefully, "would you es-timate it would take for a man of Ferry's caliber to
succumb?"
After briefly calculating, Lupov said huskily, "At least an hour."
"Too long," Jaime said.
Lupov, woodenly, nodded slowly, up and down.
"If the foil reaches us first," Jaimé said then, "and takes both of us out, will Ferry's pattern be altered?"
What a waste, he thought; what a dreadful, impossible waste, if not. Everything we set up: the
pseudo-worlds, the fake class of "weevils," everything—with no result. And to be so close, so incredibly
close! Again he turned his attention to the small screen; he deliberately forgot everything else. Why not?
he asked himself bitterly. After all, there was nothing they could do, now that the defense-foil from von
Einem's lab had passed through the gate and had come here to Fomalhaut IX.
"I can't predict," Lupov said, half to himself in a drab mutter, "what Ferry will do, if you and I are—"
The back of the bunker burst in a shower of murder-ing white and green sparks. Jaimé Weiss shut his
eyes.

Studying the page before him, Theo Ferry, engrossed, failed to hear the buzzer at his neck-com the first
time. At last, however, he became aware of it, grasped the fact that von Einem was attempting to reach



him. "Yes," he said brusquely. "What is it, Sepp?"
"You are in extreme danger," the distant, faded voice came to him, a tinny, gnat-like dancing whisper
from many light years off. "Throw away that thing you have, whatever it is; it's a Lupov invention—the
'wash technique strictured for you, sir! Hurry!"
With unbelievable effort Theo Ferry managed to close the book. The page of print vanished . . . and as
soon as it did so he felt strength return to his arms; volition flooded back and he at once jumped up,
drop-ping the book. It tumbled wildly to the ground, pages fluttering; Theo Ferry at once jumped on it,
ground his heel into the thing—hideously, it emitted a shrill living cry, and then became silent.
Alive, he thought. An alien life form; no wonder it could deal with my recent activities; the page actually
contained nothing—it was no book at all, only one of those awful Ganymede life-mirrors that Lupov was
sup-posed to use. That entity that reflects back to you your own thoughts. Ugh. He winced with
aversion. And it almost got me, he said to himself. Close.
"The report back by the foil," von Einem's far-off voice came to him, "indicates that Lupov and Weiss
built up over a long period of time, perhaps even years, an intricate structure of subworlds of a hypnotic,
delusional type, to trap you when you made your crucial trip to Whale's Mouth. Had they fully
concentrated on that and left Greg Gloch alone they might very well have been successful. This way—"
"Did you get Weiss and Lupov?" he demanded.
Von Einem said, "Yes. As near as I can determine. I'm still waiting for the certified results, but it seems
hopeful. If I may explain about these mutually exclusive delusional worlds—"
"Forget it," Ferry broke in harshly. "I have to get out of here." If they could come this close, then he was
hardly safe, even now; they had spotted him, prepared for him—Lupov and Weiss might be gone, but
that still left others. Rachmael ben Applebaum, he thought. We didn't get you, I suppose. And you have
done us a good deal of harm already, harm that we know of. Theoretic-ally you could do much, much
more.
Except, he thought as he groped in his clothing for the variety of miniaturized weapons he knew were
there,we're not going to let you. Too much is at stake; too many lives are involved. You will not
succeed, even if you have outlasted Mat Glazer-Holliday, Lupov and Weiss and possibly even that Freya
girl, the one who was Mat's mistress and now is yours—you still don't stand a chance.
Thinly, he smiled. This part I will enjoy, he realized. My taking you out of action, ben Applebaum. For
this I will operate out of my own ship,Apteryx Nil. When I'm finally there, I'll be safe. Even from you.
And you, he said to himself, have no place equal to it; even if theOmphalos were here at Whale's Mouth
it would not be enough.
Nothing, ben Applebaum, he thought harshly, will be enough. Not when I've reachedApteryx Nil. As I
enter it your tiny life fades out.
Forever.

16



To Freya Holm the flapple repeated in high-pitched anxiety, "Sir or madam, you must evacuate at once;
all living humans must leave me, as my meta-battery is about to deteriorate. Due to various punctures in
my hull, which punctures having been caused by the demolition of the simulacrum of Mr. Ferry, or rather
because of which—in any case I am no longer able to maintain homeostasis, or whatever the phrase is.
Please, sir or madam; do heed me: your life, sir or madam, is being risked each moment!"
Furiously, Freya grated, "And go where, once I leave here?"
"Down to the surface of the planet," the flapple said, in a tone of voice suggesting ultimate mechanical
smug-ness; as far as the flapple was concerned it had solved everything.
"Jump?" she demanded. "Two thousand feet?"
"Well, I suppose your point is well-taken," the flapple said in a disgruntled tone; it evidently was
displeased to have its solution dealt with so readily. "But the enor-mous inter-plan and -system ship
which I am now attached to; why not hie yourself there? Or however the expression goes."
"It's Ferry's!"
"Ferry's, Schmerry's," the flapple said. "This way you'll perish when I do. You want THAT?"
"All right," she snarled, and made her way un-steadily toward the entrance hatch of the flapple, the link
between it and the huge ship blowing its ceaseless wisps of fuel vapor, obviously ready to take off at an
in-stant's command.
"My meta-battery has nowwwaaaa foooof," the flapple intoned hazily; its expiration had accelerated by
leaps and bounds.
"Goodbye," Freya said, and passed out through the entrance hatch, cautiously following the shorter of
the two THL agents.
Behind her the flapple murmured in its dim fashion, "Tttturnnn uppp yrrrr hearing aaaaaaiddddd,
missss-zzzz." And drifted into oblivion.
Good riddance, she decided.
A moment later she had entered the great ship—Theo Ferry's post from which
he—obviously—operated when on Fomalhaut IX.
"Kill her," a voice said.
She ducked. A laser beam cut past her head; in-stantly she rolled, spun to one side, thinking, They did it
to Mat, but not to me; they can't do it to me. A second last try for us, she thought desperately; if
Rachmael can do anything. I can't. "Ferry," she gasped. "Please!"
The prayer proved worthless. Four THL agents, in military brown, deployed strategically at several
com-pass points of the ship's central cabin, aimed at her emotionlessly, while at the controls, his face a
dull mask of almost indifferent concentration, sat Theodoric Ferry. And, she realized, this was the man



himself; this did not constitute a simulacrum.
"Do you know," Ferry said to her quietly, "where Rachmael ben Applebaum is at this moment?"
"No," she gasped. Truthfully.
At that Ferry nodded toward the four THL agents; the man to his

See Note on page V

pseudopodia several remaining unchewed eyes, and these it had placed close to its stomach in order to
see properly. "Yes, it's still in there—and you can have it, free! No, but seriously, folks, the twentieth
edition is worth a lot more to a collector than the seventeenth; get it while the getting's good or this free
money-back offer expires forever."
After a pause Rachmael shut his eyes and reached his hand gropingly into the midsection of the
cephalopodic life form.
"Fine, fine," the eye-eater chortled. "That feels really cool, as the ancients said. Got hold of it yet? Reach
deeper, and don't mind if the digestive juices destroy your sleeve; that's show biz, or whatever it was they
formerly said. Tee-hee!"
His fingers touched something firm within the gela-tinous, oozing mass. The edge of the book?
Or—something else. It felt very much as if—incredibly—it consisted of the crisp, starched, lower edge of
a woman's bra.
"For god's sake!" a female voice declared furiously. And at the same instant a small but wildly intent
hand grabbed his, forced it back toward him.
Immediately he opened his eyes. The eye-eater glowered at him in indignation. But—it had changed.
From it long strands of women's hair grew; the eye-eater had a distinctly female appearance. Even its
paw-ful of eyes had altered; they now appeared elongated, graceful, with heavy lashes. A woman's eyes,
he realized with a thrill of terror.
"Who are you?" he demanded, almost unable to speak; he jerked his hand back in revulsion and the
pseudopodium released him.
The pseudopodia of the eye-eater, all of them, ter-minated in small, delicate hands. Like the hair and the
eyes, distinctly female.
The eye-eater had become a woman. And, near the center of its body, it wore—ludicrously—the stiff
white bra.



The eye-eater said, in a high-pitched voice, almost a squeal of indignation, "I'm Gretch Borbman, of
course. And I frankly don't believe it's very funny to—do what you did just now." Breathing hotly, the
eye-eater glowered even more darkly.
"I'm—sorry," he managed to say. "But I'm lost in damn paraworld; it's not my fault. So don't condemn
me."
"Which paraworld is it this time?" the eye-eater demanded. "The same one as before?"
He started to answer . . . and then noticed something which froze him into silence where he stood. Other
eye-eaters had begun to appear, slowly undulating toward him and Gretch Borbman. Some had the
distinct cast of masculinity; some obviously were, like Gretch, female.
The class. Assembling together in response to what Gretch had said.
"He attempted to reach inside me," the eye-eater calling itself Gretchen Borbman explained to the rest of
them. "I wonder which paraworld that would in-dicate."
"Mr. ben Applebaum," one of the other eye-eaters, almost certainly Sheila Quam by the sound of her
voice, said. "In view of what Miss Borbman says, I think it is virtually mandatory for me to declare a
special emer-gency Computer Day; I would say that beyond a reason-able doubt this situation which
you've created calls for it."
"True," the eye-eater named Gretch agreed; the others, to varying degrees, also nodded in unison. "Have
his paraworld gestalt fed in so it can be examined and compared. Personally I don't think it's likeanyone
else's, but of course that's up to the computer to deter-mine. Myself, I feel perfectly safe; I know that
whatever he saw, or rather sees, bears absolutely no resemblance to anythingI ever perceived."
"What did he do just now," an eye-eater which reminded him of Hank Szantho said, "that made you yip
like that?"
The Gretch Borbman thing said in a low, sullen voice, "He attempted to diddle me."
"Well," the Hank Szantho eye-eater said mildly, "I don't see where that alone indicates anything; I might
even attempt that myself, some day. Anyhow, as long as Sheila feels it's called for—"
"I've already got the forms ready," the one whom he had identified as Sheila Quam said. To Rachmael
she said, "Here is 47-B; I've already signed it. Now, if you'll come with me—" She glanced toward the
Gretchen Borbman eye-eater. "Miss Borbman already knows her paraworld . . . I hope her confidence is
vin-dicated; I hope that what you perceive, Mr. ben Apple-baum, is not congruent with hers."
"I hope so, too," the Gretchen Borbman thing agreed faintly.
"As I recall," the Sheila Quam eye-eating entity declared, "Mr. ben Applebaum's initial delusional
ex-perience, set off by the LSD dart, consisted of involve-ment with the garrison state. Do you
remember clearly enough to voluntarily testify to that, Mr. ben Apple-baum?"
"Yes," he said huskily. "And then the aquatic—"
"But before that," Sheila interrupted. "When you first crossed by Telpor. Before the dart—before the
LSD."



Hazily, he said, "It's a blur to me, now." Reality, for him, had slipped and floundered too much; he could
not be absolutely sure of the sequence of events. With a vast final effort he summoned his waning
attention, focussed on his past—it seemed a billion light-years ago, and yet in actuality the experience
with the garrison state had been reasonably recent. "It was before," he said, then. "I perceived the
garrison state, the fighting;then a THL soldier shot me. So the experience with the garrison state came
first; then, after the LSD, the aquatic nightmare-shape."
Hank Szantho said thoughtfully, "You may be inter-ested to know, Mr. ben Applebaum, that you are not
the first person among us to live with that hallucina-tion—I refer to the prior one, that of the garrison
state. If your delusional gestalt, when you present it to the computer, comes out on those lines, I can
assure you that a tru bi-personal view of a paraworld will have been established . . . and this, of course,
is what we fear, as you well know. Do you want to see the garrison state world established as the
authentic reality?" His voice lifted harshly. "Consider."
"The choice," Sheila Quam said, "is not his; it's mine. I therefore officially declare this late Wednes-day
afternoon and Computer Day, and I order Mr. ben Applebaum to accept this form I hold here, to fill it
out, and then return it to me, as Control, to sign. You understand, Mr. ben Applebaum? Can you think
clearly enough to follow what I'm saying?"
Reflexively, he accepted the form from her. "A pen?" he asked.
"A pen." Sheila Quam, plus all the other eye-eating quasi-forms, began to search about their bulb-like
bodies—to no avail.
"Chrissake," Rachmael said irritably, and searched his own pockets. Not only to be compelled to fill out
the 47-B form, but to come up with his own pencil—
In his pocket his fingers touched something: a flat, small tin. Puzzled, he lifted it out, examined it. The
eye-eaters around him did so, as well. In particular the Gretchen Borbman one.

MORE FUN
AFTER DONE!

"How disgusting," Gretchen Borbman said. To the others she said, "A tin of Yucatán prophoz. The
worst kind possible—fully automated, helium-battery powered, good for a five-year life span . . . is this
what you had in mind, Mr. ben Applebaum, when you diddled me a moment ago?"
"No," he said. "I forgot Ihad these." Chilled, he thought, Have I had this all along? The cammed,
hyper-minned UN weapon: the personnel variation of the time-warping construct which constituted the
major device in Horst Bertold's arsenal. Naturally he retained it; the effectiveness of the camouflage lay
beyond dispute—and had now been tested and ratified in prac-tice . . . it had even seemed to him, during
the first moment of discovery, that this was exactly as it ap-peared to be: a box of prophoz and nothing
more.
"Out of respect for decency and the women present here," the Hank Szantho eye-eater stated, "I believe



you should put that obnoxiously specific tin away, Mr. ben Applebaum; don't you, on second thought,
agree?"
"I suppose so," he said. And opened the tin.

Acrid smoke billowed about him, stinging his nos-trils. He halted, dropped into an instinctive crouch of
self-defense; here, on the ninth planet of the Fomalhaut System, Rachmael ben Applebaum held the
opened tin of Yucatán prophoz, studied the tiny, intricate con-trols of the time-warping instrument which
the UN had provided him. More fun after done, he said to himself. Well, we'll see; we'll wait until we're
done—we'll wait until we've found Freya.
That was his purpose, here at Whale's Mouth; noth-ing else mattered.
Directly before him a soldier appeared. Huge owl-like eyes fixed on him . . . he stared back; he and the
THL soldier confronted each other, both shocked into im-mobility by surprise. And then Rachmael
dropped, rolled.
Barely in time. The LSD dart, with a muffledpop, passed over his head and exploded somewhere behind
him. Out of range.
Fumbling for the prophoz tin, he thought, Too soon; they picked me up almost at once. Standing over
him, the THL soldier took careful aim; this time he would not miss. The grubby, professional fingers
squeezed the trigger of the dart-launcher—
And Rachmael once more spun the controls of the time-warpage device.

"Genet," the maitre d' called sternly, with overtones of fussiness.
A waitress, wearing the lace stockings and partial jacket-vest now popular, approached; her right
nipple, exposed, ornately capped by a complex Swiss construct which played semi-classical music
continually and at the same time lit and relit in a series of lovely light-patterns, winked at Rachmael
enticingly. "Yes, Caspar," the girl sighed, with a toss of her dark-blonde, high-piled natu-ral hair.
"Escort Mr. Applebaum to table twenty-three," the maitre d' told her, and ignored with haughty
indiffer-ence the outraged line of customers who had been wait-ing god knew how long for a table.
"I don't want to—" Rachmael began, but the maitre d' cut him off.
"All arranged.She is waiting at twenty-three." He winked, then, at Rachmael, as if he knew everything. It
was, Rachmael decided, a compliment; anyhow he had no choice but to accept it as that.
Through the noise and darkness of the Fox's Lair he followed the light-emitting useful nipple-assist of the
waitress. By table after table they walked, and then, all at once, Genet halted.
There, seated in silence, smoking a cigarette, sat Freya Holm.
"You understand," Rachmael said as he took the chair beside her, "that this is the second time. That I've



met you here." From her pack he took a cigarette, read the health-warning sticker, then lit up. At least it
is for me, he realized. But I suppose not for you.
"No," Freya said, shaking her head. "I don't un-derstand. Do you want to explain it to me, or do you
enjoy mystifying young ladies? "
Reaching into his pocket he groped for the tin of Yucatan prophoz . . .
And found nothing.
"Of course," he said, feeling hot prickles of chagrin ignite the back of his reddening neck. "I'm now back
too far." Before the U.N. wep-x people provided me with it, he realized. So I can't use it again;I'm on
my own, now. Exactly as I was when I sat here before. It was a darkly sobering realization; the
rapprochement with Horst Bertold had not taken place—and possibly never would. The future—and that
important moment had again become a portion of the future, not the past—was always in absolute flux.
Everything that had been accomplished with Bertold—in fact everything that had been done period—had
been expunged, wiped away.
Everything, too, which had gone wrong.That had been obliterated as well—hence his return, here to this
spot, to this moment in his life, the moment when the first successful sortie against them had been carried
out: the moment when Freya Holm had failed to transfer the deep-sleep components from her possession
to his.
". . . There is a strip of titanium within the righthand overleaf of the menu," Freya was saying softly to
him. "The container of scent within my purse has a titanium-tropic ambulation-circuit; it will within one or
two seconds register the presence of the strip and will then rotate itself out of my purse, which I've left
open on purpose. It will travel across the underside of the menu. Do you see?"
"I see," Rachmael said, "but I can tell you that it's all a damn waste of technog and time; a robot
operating for Ferry's interest is going to intercept the components and I'll never get my hands on them.
Take my word for it." Because I know, he said savagely to himself, with overpowering wrath.
"In that case we have another plan." Freya Holm did not appear perturbed. "TheOmphalos will be
systemat-ically disassembled, reduced to sections small enough to pass through a Telpor station as
luggage. On the far side, at Whale's Mouth, technicians from Lies Incorpo-rated will reassemble the ship,
and, from the Fomalhaut system, you will travel across deep space back to Terra. How do you feel
about that? Would you compromise in that extent? If we can't manage to get the components to you, as
you say—"
"Be quiet." He had spotted the busboy who, carrying the chest-high load of dishes, would bump him at
the crucial instant and acquire the vital deep-sleep com-ponents before he could transfer them to his
cloak pocket. Now that I know, he mused, is it possible that I can deflect it? Does my advance
knowledge equip me to deal with this action on the part of Theo Ferry? He did not know enough about
time travel to be sure. But if the knowledge proved useless,then why did the UN regard the
time-warping construct as a major weapon?
He had to assume—by the logical of the situation—that his prior knowledge would constitute, at least
potentially, a decisive new factor; the original scene would not unroll mechanically, to the same
termination.
Based on this realization it seemed evident that he should make at least one overt try to thwart the robot



busboy. And if he failed—then he was no worse off then before, at the original encounter. And he had
made a successful escape from the class of weevils, from the threat

See Note on page V

I can still obtain the deep-sleep components, he realized. Despite what the menu says. But—
Do I still want them?
There was nothing now to learn about Whale's Mouth; he had been there, seen it all.
Or had he?
"All I've seen," he said slowly, aloud, "is one para-world after another." Chilled, he realized, I still don't
know which is real. The class, through its Control Sheila Quam, had been on the verge of determining
which of the several possibilities was the authentic one. Had he waited fifteen minutes longer he would
have found out.
A weak shock made his right hand tingle; the con-tainer of deep-sleep components within Freya's purse
had responded to the strip of titanium in the menu and had already crawled across the underside of the
page to make physical contact with him.
With his fingers he pried it, clam-like, loose from its grip, its tropism; the object dropped into his lap and
he experienced its real, actual weight. After a pause he reached out with his left hand to transfer it sight
unseen, even by him, to the pocket of his cloak . . .
"Oops—sorry." The robot busboy had stumbled against him as it conveyed its chest-high load of dirty
dishes back to the kitchen.
At once Rachmael leaped up; seizing the artificial candle in the center of his table he brought it down
with all his strength onto the metal head of the robot.
Without hesitation the robot busboy kicked him in the groin.
"It's got the components," he gasped to Freya, shud-dering in abysmal pain. "Don't—let it—get away!"
Swiftly reacting, Freya clouted the robot busboy with her purse. A torrent of metal and plastic parts
rained from it, and out of its hand fell the circular container of deep-sleep components; Rachmael, despite
his agony, managed to close his fingers around it.
"What's going on here?" Caspar, the maitre d' yelled, striding toward the three of them, his face dark
with outrage.



"Come on," Rachmael said, seizing Freya by the arm. "Let's get out of here." He led her among the
squeezed-together tables, toward one of the exits; the other diners gaped at them in bewilderment.
"I got it," he said as he and Freya stepped out into the deserted, faintly misty street, the looming
down-town section of San Diego; a few for-hire flapples jogged and fluttered past, but that was all—the
two of them had gotten away. With, this time, the components.
"You're going to make the trip?" Freya asked as they walked on, away from the Fox's Lair, toward a
lighted main intersection.
"Yes," he said, nodding. So everythingwas changed. He would go to Whale's Mouth, but not as before;
not via Telpor. This time he would make the trip across deep space to Fomalhaut as he had intended all
along. The way I wanted it from the start, he realized. And no one can stop me, now; not Ferry, not von
Einem—not even Lupov, whichever side he's on, if not both sides simultaneously.
The air, in his lungs, the cool cloudy scent of the city, tasted good; he inhaled deeply, and strode on at an
in-creased pace.
Freya said, "It's a very good thing you're doing. Very brave. I admire you for it." She wiggled her hand
beneath his arm so that she was hanging onto him, ad-miringly; he felt her keen, appraising gaze.
"It's a good thing," he agreed. But, he realized, not so brave; in fact not brave at all, in comparison to
what I encountered—and would have to encounter again—by direct teleportation to Whale's Mouth.
Theodoric Ferry, the dead, resurrected monster that claimed once to have been Matson
Glazer-Holliday—this flight, long as it is, eighteen vast and empty light-years of it, will be much easier.
And, he thought, I won't even know its tedious length because at last I havethis. His hand, in the pocket
of his cloak, closed over and tightly squeezed the cylinder of deep-sleep components, engagingly marked
Eternity of Sexual Potency Fragrance #54.
And, he realized, during the intervals in which I am conscious, when it's necessary to recorrect the
trajectory of theOmphalos, I could have someone with me for company. Someone I like—and know I
would like in-creasingly better as time goes on . . . goes its regular path, undisturbed. This, he realized, is
the genuine solution. Finally. This—and not the UN's time-warping device or any device at all.
Thinking that, he paused before entering the area of light; in the darkness of the side street, unnoticed by
passers-by, he scrutinized Freya Holm a long, long period.
"Hmm," he said, half aloud. Contemplatively.
"What are you thinking about?" Freya asked shyly, her dark, full lashes trembling as she returned his
stare. "The years of deep sleep ahead of you?"
"Not quite that," Rachmael answered. "Something a little more this side of sleep. But connected with it."
He put his arm around her.
"Gee," Freya said after a time.
In his pocket the container of components hummed happily.



